REMNANT RAISING AND VSO CLAUSAL ARCHITECTURE

Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 

VOLUME 66

Managing Editors

Marcel den Dikken, City University of New York
Liliane Haegeman, University of Lille
Joan Maling, Brandeis University

Editorial Board
Guglielmo Cinque, University of Venice
Carol Georgopoulos, University of Utah
Jane Grimshaw, Rutgers University
Michael Kenstowicz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Hilda Koopman, University of California, Los Angeles
Howard Lasnik, University of Connecticut at Storrs
Alec Marantz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
John J. McCarthy, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Ian Roberts, University of Cambridge

The titles published in this series are listed at the end of this volume.

REMNANT RAISING AND VSO

CLAUSAL ARCHITECTURE

A Case Study  fo  San Lucas Quiavin  Zapotec

í 

by

FELICIA LEE

University of British Columbia, 

BC, Canada

A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.

ISBN-10  1-4020-4300-7 (HB)
ISBN-13  978-1-4020-4300-0 (HB)
ISBN-10  1-4020-4308-2 (e-book)
ISBN-13  978-1-4020-4308-6 (e-book)

Published by Springer,

P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

www.springer.com

Printed on acid-free paper

No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted

in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording

or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception

of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered

All Rights Reserved

© 2006 Springer

and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.

Printed in the Netherlands.

Contents 

 
Foreword 
 
Preface 
 
1.  An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 
 
2.   Background and Theoretical Assumptions 
 
3.   The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: 
        Arguments for VP Raising 
 
4.   Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement: 
        Some Common Negation Structures in SLQZ 
 
5.   More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: 
        The Syntax of Questions 
 
6.   The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas 
        Quiaviní Zapotec 
 
References 
 

vii 

xi 

1 

29 

49 

107 

165 

199 

269 

Preface 

I am deeply indebted to the following individuals for their intellectual, fi-
nancial, and moral support: 

Pamela Munro first introduced me to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec dur-
ing her own pioneering research on the language, and introduced me to the 
joys of linguistic fieldwork. She has been a great mentor, role model, and 
friend. My Los Angeles-based language consultants, Rodrigo Garcia, Paco 
Lopez, and Felipe Lopez have been the most thoughtful, helpful, and gen-
erous  consultants one could hope for, and I am deeply indebted to them. I 
also owe a debt of gratitude to the people of San Lucas Quiaviní for their 
hospitality, patience, and helpfulness during my visits to their town. 

This current work grew out of my UCLA dissertation, and I am grateful 
to  Hilda  Koopman  and  Tim  Stowell  for  helping  me  through  the  early 
stages  of  my  syntactic  theorizing.  Aaron  Broadwell,  Andrew  Carnie, 
Henry  Davis,  Rose-Marie  Déchaine,  Richard  Kayne,  Lisa  Matthewson, 
and Martina Wiltschko also provided useful comments and questions dur-
ing the development of this work. Lisa was also kind enough to fund some 
of my fieldwork through a grant of hers, for which I am also grateful. 

Further  funding  for  this  work  comes  from  a  University of  British  Co-
lumbia Hampton grant on first-language acquisition in SLQZ held by my-
self and Joseph Stemberger.  I am grateful to Joe and our two graduate re-
search assistants (Diana Gibraiel and Mario Chavez Peon) for sharing my 
interest in SLQZ.  Their insights on SLQZ, mostly in the realm of phonol-
ogy,  morphophonemics,  and  acquisition,  have  been  both  stimulating  and 
humbling to me: they remind me of how much more work there still is to 
be done. 

Thanks are also due to Bryan Gick, Chris Golston, Paivi Koskinen, Ki-
mary Shahin, and their respective spouses and families: they  provided me 
with  friendship,  entertainment,  and  both  linguistic  and  non-linguistic  ad-
vice, all useful and accurate. 

My  parents,  Fred  and  Margaret  Lee,  and  sisters  (Serena,  Pamela,  and 

Sondra) have always stood by me, and will always have my gratitude. 

Finally,  I  owe  my  thanks  to  Glenn  Price,  for  everything  else  I  could 

want in life. 

 

Foreword 

The goals of this book are twofold: first, to document some of the basic 
syntactic  structures  of  SLQZ,  a  little-examined  indigenous  language  of 
Mexico; and second, to  explore the theoretical implications of SLQZ syn-
tactic  structure  for  other  VSO  languages.    A  major  challenge  posed  by 
SLQZ is the large number of syntactic contexts, such as negation and ad-
verbial  clitic  placement,  in  which  verbs  and  XPs  such  as  prepositional 
phrases and DPs may appear interchangeably. The existence of such struc-
tures raises serious questions about the generally held assumption that verb 
movement for tense and agreement checking is invariably head-movement. 
I  argue instead that verbal movement in SLQZ is actually VP-remnant 
movement, rather than head-movement: this allows  verbs and other con-
stituents to treated uniformly in the contexts in which they both may ap-
pear. I  also show that such an analysis can be motivated theoretically by 
Kayne’s (1994) Antisymmetry constraints. I will show that not only do the 
highly constrained rules on possible movement and base-generated struc-
ture  account  for  the  complex  morphological  and  syntactic  structures  of 
SLQZ, but potentially other, unrelated, VSO languages as well.  

Chapter 2 presents the theoretical background to be assumed in the rest 
of the work. Here, Kayne’s work on antisymmetry will be introduced, and 
some of its possible consequences laid out. Chapter 2 will also provide a 
brief  outline  of  previous  research  on  the  derivation  of  VSO  word  order 
across a range of languages. In this section of the chapter, I  present evi-
dence from SLQZ showing that these previous analyses cannot account for 
the morphological and word order constraints of SLQZ. 

Chapter 3 presents the central thesis of this work: if Kayne’s principles 
of antisymmetry are to be maintained, it must be assumed that VSO word 
order  in  SLQZ  is  derived  by  movement  of  a  VP-remnant,  rather  than  a 
verbal head, to clause-initial position. This proposal is supported by both 
morphological and syntactic data: first, I show that there is no way to de-
rive the ordering of verbal morphemes in SLQZ verbal complexes through 
head-movement without assuming a base structure radically different from 
any  attested  in  the  literature;  second,  I  show  that  SLQZ  verbs  and  full  
 
 

x     Foreword 

phrasal projections such as DPs and PPs participate interchangeably in a 
number of syntactic constructions. The fact that SLQZ verbs behave like 
XPs  in  syntactic  operations  supports  the  morphological  evidence  against 
their  head  status.  I  also  briefly  outline  evidence  that  VP-remnant-
movement may also account for VSO word order in a number of other, un-
related languages. 

In  Chapter  4,  I  show  how  the  VP-raising  analysis  accounts  for  three 
common SLQZ negation constructions:  clausal negation, constituent nega-
tion,  and  existential  negation.  I  will  also  show  that  differences  between 
these negation structures can be used as diagnostics to determine the order-
ing of left periphery functional projections, such as focus, and topic projec-
tions,  in  SLQZ.  Furthermore,  constraints  on  the  interaction  of  negation 
structures  with  other  constructions,  such  as  questions  and  relative  clause 
formation,  also  reveal  additional  antisymmetry-driven  constraints  on 
movement and structure, which will be described in detail. 

Chapter 5 builds upon the analysis of functional projections developed 
in Chapter 4.  It examines the syntax and semantics of question formation 
in SLQZ, which reveal additional information about the interaction of left 
periphery  projections  (such  as  focus,  topic,  and  mood)  in  syntactic  con-
structions and in the expression of different information structures. Much 
of  this  information  comes  from  the  examination  of  yes/no  questions: 
SLQZ employs three distinct yes/no question markers, which differ both in 
their  syntactic  features  and  their  discourse  uses.  WH-questions  in  SLQZ 
also reveal important information about the syntax of questions, and chal-
lenge  some  commonly  held  ideas  about  the  correlation  between  wh-
movement and syntactic focus movement: while it has been argued for a 
range  of  languages  that  wh-movement  and  focus  movement  target  the 
same projection, SLQZ reveals a number of contexts in which they may 
co-occur in the same clause. This suggests that wh- and focus target differ-
ent  projections:  the  numerous  contexts  in  SLQZ  and  other  languages  in 
which they appear to compete for the same position are due to the semantic 
requirements of wh-words: they encode focus as well as interrogative fea-
tures, which in most cases are checked by movement of the word through 
focus. 

Chapter 6  shows both syntactic and interpretive evidence for the pres-
ence of syntactic tense in SLQZ. While the Zapotec languages have been 
traditionally thought to lack syntactic tense and be purely aspect marking, I  
show that some of SLQZ’s aspect markers should actually be considered 
tense  markers that also encode aspect.  Evidence for this comes from the 
different  possible  interpretations  of  these  markers  in  different  syntactic 
contexts, such as differences in possible interpretation between fronted and 
 

Foreword     xi 

 in  situ  clausal  complements  of  verbs  with  certain  tense/aspect  markers. 
Furthermore,  the  behavior  of  these  aspect  markers  in  different  syntactic 
configurations suppports recent proposals that tense is scope-sensitive, and 
that  certain  morphological  tense  markers  should  be  treated  as  polarity 
items sensitive to the presence of tense heads, rather than heads of tense 
projections themselves. This chapter also shows how these proposals are 
implemented syntactically, and that their syntax is consistent with the VP-
raising analysis previously outlined. 

 

 

1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní 

Zapotec 

1.1 Overview  

This chapter presents a brief overview of the geneological, geographical, 
and ethnological background of SLQZ and its speakers, as well as a brief 
descriptive survey of  the basic features of SLQZ phonology, morphology, 
and  grammar.  No  theoretical  explanation  is    attempted  here;  rather,  this 
chapter aims to provide a basic overview  of some of the data that will be 
accounted for in later chapters. This chapter gives special attention to the 
distribution and interpretation of SLQZ aspect markers. These markers, as 
will be shown below, also encode information about tense and mood. This 
chapter  will  also  introduce  some  of  the  basic  technical  terminology  and  
assumptions about SLQZ syntax that I assume in the rest of this work. 

 Much  of  this  terminology I adopt, as well as  large proportion of the  
basic  information  described  here,  was  first  observed  and  documented  in 
the  San  Lucas  Quiaviní  Zapotec  dictionary  (Munro,  Lopez,  et  al  1999) 
(hereafter referred to as ML).1 Many of the examples below come directly 
from  this  work,  and  will  be  cited  as  such.  Unmarked  examples  given  in 
this  and  following  chapters  come  from  my  own  fieldnotes  or  those  col-
lected in the SLQZ field methods course given at UCLA in fall 1994 and 
winter 1995. 

1.2 SLQZ: The Language and Its Speakers 

SLQZ  belongs to the Otomanguean stock, which comprises 174 diverse 
languages  spoken  over  much  of  Mexico.  It  belongs  to  the  Zapotecan 
 
 
 

                                                      

1  Munro,  Pamela,  and  Felipe  H.  Lopez    (with  Michael  R.  Gallant,  Rodrigo 
Garcia  and  Olivia  V.Méndez)  (1999)  Dicyonaary  X:tèe’n  Dìi’zh  Sah 
Sann  Luu’c:  San  Lucas  Quiaviní  Zapotec  Dictionary.  Diccionario  
Zapoteco de San Lucas Quiaviní. Chicano Studies Research Center Pub-
lications,, UCLA 

 

The  exact  number  of  Zapotec  languages  is  under  debate;  the  SIL  
Ethnologue  (Grimes  2005)  currently  lists  58  Zapotec  languages.  Mutual  
intelligibility (or the lack of it)  is standardly used to determine if different 
varieties of Zapotec spoken in a geographically contiguous area are indeed 
distinct languages, or the same language with minor dialectal differences. 
Use of this diagnostic is complicated by the fact that intelligibility between 
the  speech  varieties  of  neighboring  communities  not  always  mutually 
symmetric:  as  the  SIL  Ethnologue  notes,  speakers  of  San  Juan  Guelavia 
Zapotec,  a  Valley  Zapotec  language,  feel  there  is  a 100% intelligibility 
rate  between 
in
 Tlacolula. However, speakers of Tlacolula Zapotec perceive only a 58% 
intelligibility rate with SJG Zapotec. 

Zapotec   variety 

language  and 

SLQZ is spoken in the town of San Lucas Quiaviní, Oaxaca. It is located 
about 3 miles outside Tlacolula, a town of about 15,000 people that serves 
as a regional market center. Like most indigenous towns in Mexico, San 
Lucas Quiaviní takes its name from two sources: a Spanish saint’s name, 
and  an  indigenous  place  name.  (“Quiaviní”  is  a  Hispanicization  of 
Gyi’bnnii,  which is thought to be derived from a SLQZ word for a type  
of precious stone.) 

spoken 

their 

the 

2      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

group of languages, which itself is divided into two families:  Zapotec  and 
Chatino. The Chatino languages are all spoken in Oaxaca, and the much 
larger  group  of  Zapotec  languages  are  spoken  in  Oaxaca  and  Veracruz 
State. 

Kaufman  (1993)  further  divides  the  Zapotec  languages  into three sub-
groups: Northern, Central, and Southern Zapotec.  Under this classification 
system,  SLQZ  falls  into  the  Central  Zapotec  group,  which  includes  the 
Zapotec varieties spoken in the Oaxaca Valley  south of Oaxaca City. 

About 2000 people currently live full-time in San Lucas (according to 
1990  census  figures).  Most  support  themselves  as  farmers.  A  significant 
percentage of working-age men from the town live and work in the United 
States (mostly in the Los Angeles area) while supporting families in San 
Lucas; other families from   San Lucas  have settled permanently in theUS.  
Virtually  all  residents  of  San  Lucas  are  fluent  in  SLQZ.    The  town’s 
civic affairs are conducted in SLQZ, and children still acquire it as a first 
language,  getting  their  first  exposure  to  Spanish  in  elementary  school. 
Residents who have attended school or worked outside San Lucas are bi-
lingual  in  SLQZ  and  Spanish  (and  sometimes  English),  but  many  older 
people,  particularly  women,  are  monolingual  SLQZ  speakers.  However, 
because  of  the  small  size  of  the  community  and increasing social and 
economic  ressures  to assimilate into mainstream Mexican  (or American) 
culture, the language is considered endangered. 

The  data  in  this  work  come  from  several  sources.  Unmarked  SLQZ  
examples in this work come from notes collected during a field methods 
course  on  SLQZ  offered  at  UCLA  in  the  1994-1995  academic  year  or  
my  own  fieldnotes  taken  in  subsequent  years.  Other  SLQZ  examples  
 

    A Brief  Overview of  SQLZ  Phonology 
   1.3

3

have  been  taken  from  ML  and  from  recordings  made  in  San  Lucas 
Quiaviní in summer 2004. 

1.2.1 Previous Work on  the Language 
Munro and Lopez’s (1999) dictionary of SLQZ was the first comprehen-
sive  published  record  of  the  language.  A  number  of  closely  related  lan-
guages spoken in the region surrounding San Lucas, however, have been 
closely  documented:  San  Juan  Guelavía  Zapotec  (Jones  and  Knudsen 
1977),  Santa  Ana  del  Valle  Zapotec  (Broadwell  1991),  San  Pablo  Güilá 
Zapotec (Lopez Cruz 1997), and Mitla Zapotec (Briggs 1961, Stubblefield 
and Stubblefield 1991). Lopez Cruz, and a number of SLQZ speakers con-
sulted by Munro and Lopez, feel that of these languages, San Pablo Güilá 
Zapotec bears the closest resemblance to SLQZ.  

1.3 A Brief Overview of SLQZ Phonology 

SLQZ  has  a  complex  phonetic  and  phonological  system,  which  includes 
phonemic  distinctions  among  four  phonation  types,  as  well  as  distinct 
tones. 

1.3.1 SLQZ Consonants 
In this section, I will briefly outline the SLQZ sound system and the tran-
scription  orthography  for  SLQZ  developed  by  ML,  which  will  be  used 
throughout this work2. 

The inventory of consonants in SLQZ is seen in Table 1: 

 

                                                      
2 The orthographic system used in this work was originally designed as a practical 
orthography for SLQZ. However, Munro and Lopez have recently developed a 
simplified practical orthography for SLQZ, which does not reflect differences 
in vowel length or phonation type. This system, like the orthographic  systems 
developed for other Zapotec varieties, is designed for use by native speakers 
who can recover this information from context. (Munro and others still use the 
older system for transcribing texts and recording new data (P. Munro, p.c.)). I 
will  use  this  older,  more  detailed  orthography  in  this  work  in  the  interest  of 
providing a detailed  record for  non-SLQZ speakers. 

4      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

 

 

 

 
stop 

 

fricative 

nasal 

lateral 

sonorant 

affricate 

         p,b          f 

labial 
alveolar           t,d          s,z          

 mm,m 
 
 nn, n         

              w   

 ll, l               r            

 
 ts 

                                                                                      rr 

x, zh 
            x:, zh 

 

 

palatal-alveolar 
retroflex  
 
palatal 
 
         c, g 
velar 

 
 

 
ng, nng 

 

 

 

                 ch  

              j, y 

Table 1. SLQZ consonants. 

Like other Zapotec languages, SLQZ has a fortis/lenis, rather than strict 
voiced/voiceless,  contrast    in  its  consonant  pairs.  In  the  chart  above,  the 
first symbol in each pair of consonants represents a fortis consonant, the 
second its lenis counterpart. 

The exact phonetic definition of fortis and lenis consonants in Zapotec 
has long been under discussion (Nellis and Hollenbach 1980, Jaeger 1983). 
In SLQZ, the contrast between fortis and lenis obstruents generally appears 
as  a  difference  in  voicing;  lenis  obstruents  are  generally  voiced  (but  de-
voiced word-finally), and fortis obstruents are voiceless.  However, other 
acoustic factors distinguish them as well. These differences are clearest in 
the contrast between fortis and lenis stops:   lenis stops, besides being (usu-
ally)  voiced,  are  less  strongly  articulated  and  tend  to  be  fricated.  More 
subtle  differences  distinguish  fortis  and  lenis  sonorants:    fortis  sonorants 
tend to be longer, and vowels preceding them tend to be shorter. 

The  r/rr  pair  shown  above  does  not  represent  a  fortis/lenis  contrast; 
thus, they are shown on separate lines.  Rather r is a native phoneme, and 
rr (a trilled r) appears in Spanish loanwords or over morpheme boundaries. 
ML analyze it as a cluster in these contexts; they point out a similar pro-
posal made for Guelavia Zapotec, a language closely related to SLQZ, by 
Jones and Knudson (1977). 

The symbols shown in the chart represent ML’s transcription orthogra-
phy. Consistent with Spanish orthographic rules (and thus the spelling con-
ventions to which most SLQZ speakers are accustomed), the velar stops c  
and  g    are  spelled  qu    and  gu,  respectively,  before  front  vowels,  as  in  
qui’lly, “kilo”, and gui’ihzh, “dry cornstalk”. 

 

   1.3
    A Brief  Overview of  SQLZ  Phonology
   

5

 
1.3.2 SLQZ Vowels 
SLQZ has six vowels:  three high vowels, two mid vowels, and one low 
vowel, as seen in Table 2: 
 

 
 
 

i 
e 
 

ë 

 
a  

u 
o 

Table 2. SLQZ vowels. 

The  table  above  represents  the  vowels  in  SLQZ  orthography.    All  of 
these except ë  are pronounced as they would in IPA. The double-dotted 
“e” (ë)  is a high, mid, unrounded vowel;  some speakers use it only rarely 
(replacing  it  with  e  in  most  contexts),  and  it  generally  appears  less  fre-
quently than other vowels.  

These vowels may be combined to form a number of diphthongs: ai, au, 
ei, ue, ia,ie, iu, ua, ue, and ëi. ML also note that other diphthongs may also 
appear  in  certain  Spanish  loanwords.  SLQZ  also  has  contrastive  vowel 
length; long vowels are written VV. 

SLQZ has four phonation types. Besides unmarked (modal) phonation, 
SLQZ  shows  phonemic  contrast  among  breathy  vowels  (written  in  tran-
scription orthography as Vh), creaky vowels (written with a grave accent 
above  the  vowel  (  `  )  ),  and  laryngeal  (glottalized)  vowels  (written  V’). 
More than one phonation type may appear within a syllable. 

Because of this range of possible contrasts, SLQZ syllables can be quite 
complex.  ML  note  that  the  largest  possible  SLQZ  syllable  can  take  the 
form  CCGVVVCG,  where  C  represents  consonants,  V  vowels,  and  G 
glides. Although an SLQZ syllable may consist of a single vowel, most are 
consonant-initial and contain more than one vowel. 

SLQZ, like other Zapotec languages, is tonal. While tone is clearly pho-
nemically contrastive in most of the Zapotec languages documented thus 
far (see Black and Pickett (1997), among others), the situation is less clear 
in SLQZ. ML note a close correlation between phonation type (or combi-
nation  of  phonation  type)  and  tone:    so  far,  no  minimal  pairs  have  been 
found that  are identical in form and phonation type, but different only in 
tone.  For  this  reason,  ML  suggest  that  tone  may  prove  fully  predictable 
from the interaction of phonation type, stress, and other factors. This, how-
ever, remains an issue for further investigation. 

 

6      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and 

Grammar 

1.4.1 Word Order and Sentence Types 
SLQZ,  like  most  Zapotec  languages,  is  a  VSO  language.  It  also  allows 
SVO and OVS word order when the fronted argument is interpreted with 
contrastive focus: 

irr-beat Mike  Felipe 
“Mike will beat Felipe” 

 
1.  Y-tàa’az Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
 
 
 
2.  Gye’eihlly y-tàa’az Li’eb 
 
 
 
These examples provide strong evidence that focus is expressed through 
syntactic  movement  in  SLQZ.  This  point  will  be  argued  for  in  detail  in 
Chapters 3 and 4. 

Mike 
“MIKE will beat Felipe”/ “Felipe will beat MIKE” 

irr-beat  Felipe 

SLQZ also lacks overt case marking, as seen on the previous examples. 
In cases where arguments are fronted, the thematic roles of arguments is 
potentially ambiguous and must be clarified by context:  thus, in (2), the 
focused argument “Mike” can be interpreted as either a subject or an ob-
ject. 

Embedded  clauses  generally  appear  without  complementizers  or  other 
markers  of  subordination.  Their  word  order  is  identical  to  that  of  matrix 
clauses: 

 ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly cay-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb 
yesterday    neut-say Mike        prog-sick         Felipe 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe is sick” 

 
3.  Nài  
 
 
 
Yes/no  questions  in SLQZ are formed by the addition of one of three 
question markers. Two of these (laàa’  and uu) appear sentence-initially, 
and the third (èee) appears sentence-finally.  Other than the addition of the 
question marker, word order within yes/no questions remains the same as 
that of non-interrogative sentences: 

 

 

prog-read Juan book 
“Juan is reading a book” 

 
4.  Cay-ùall Jwaany li’ebr 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 

Laàa’ cay-ùall Jwaany li’ebr? 
Q    prog-read Juan book 
“Is Juan is reading a book?” 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

7

Q    prog-read Juan boo 
“Is Juan is reading a book?” 

6.  Uu  cay-ùall Jwaany li’ebr? 
 
 
 
7.  Cay-ùa’ll Jwaany li’ebr eèe? 
 
 
 
There are subtle differences in usage and meaning denoted by the choice 

prog-read Juan book   Q 
“Is Juan is reading a book?” 

what  perf-read-3s.prox  
“What did he read?” 

of question marker; these are discussed in detail in Chapter 5. 
Wh-words are fronted in SLQZ;  wh-in-situ is disallowed: 
 
8.  Xi      b-ìi’lly-ëng? 
 
 
 
9.   *B-ìi’lly-ëng xi? 
 
 
 
Multiple wh-questions are rare in SLQZ; some speakers do not use them 

perf-read-3s.prox what  
“What did he read?” 

at all, and those who do find them marginal: 

 
10.  ?Tu xi b-inylohoh? 
 
 

  who what perf-look at 
“Who saw what?” 

1.4.2 Other Basic Constructions 
SLQZ shows the canonical features of  most VSO languages:  it has prepo-
sitions   rather  than  postpositions,  adjectives  generally  follow  nouns,
 relative clauses are head-initial,  and possessive constructions are possessor 
fi

nal. 
Like  other  Zapotec  languages  (and  large  number  of  other  indigenous  
Mexican languages), SLQZ uses body part words as prepositions:  for in-
stance,  dehts,  “back”,  is  used  as  a  preposition  meaning  “in  back  of, 
behind”; laa’iny, “stomach”, is used as a preposition meaning “inside”; lo-
hoh, “face”, is used as a preposition meaning “at” or “on”. Some examples 
of these appear below: 
 

11.  N-ago’-o’        dehts yu’uh 
neut-lie-2s.inf. back house 
 
 
“You’re lying in back of the house” 
 
12.  N-u’uh    bihih laa’iny yu’uh 
neut-exist air stomach house 
 
 
“There is air in the house” 

8      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

In the remainder of this work, I will gloss these words with their prepo-
sitional meanings when they are used as such. (Lillehaugen (2003) shows 
that children acquire body part terms and homophonous location terms as 
separate lexical items, and treat them as syntactically distinct.) 

ra ca’rt 
plural letter 
“letters” 

perf-throw    person   ball    red     big 
“The man threw the big red ball” 

three    girl 
“three girls”  (from Munro, course notes, 1997) 

SLQZ attributive adjectives generally follow nouns: 
 
13.  B-cwààa’ah  bùunny  pelo’t xnìaa ròo’oh 
 
 
 
Quantifiers and determiners generally precede they nouns they modify: 
 
14.  chòonn zhyàa’p 
 
 
 
15.  Yra’ta bùunny lohnyààa’ r-unydaàa’n zêêi’ny 
 
 
 
16. 
 
 
 
Munro  observes  that  quantifiers,  like   many  adjectives,  can  behave 
syntactically  like  verbs   when  used  as  predicates:  pronominal  subject 
agreement markers may attach to them (just as they do to verbs) (17), and 
they may  appear  with  aspect  markers  (which  obligatorily  mark  verbs) 
(18-19): 

every  person  field        hab-do-much work 
“Every farmer works hard” 

irr-two-3p.prox 
“The two of them” 

 
17.  Tyo’p-rëng 
two 3p.prox 
 
 
“(There are) two of them” 
 
18.  y-ro’p-rëng 
 
 
 
19.  s-tyo’p 
def-two 
 
 
“Two more”   (examples from Munro, class notes, 1997) 
 
Aspect  markers  on    quantifiers,  however,  do  not  have  the  same  
semantic usage that they do when attached to verbs: while the Irrealis and 
Definite  aspect  markers  are  usually  used  to  express  future  events  when  
 

 

   

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

9

attached  to  verbs,  they  indicate  collective  readings  and  “more”  readings, 
respectively, when attached to quantifiers. 

Other verb-like traits of quantifiers noted by Munro are their tendency 
to  appear  sentence-initially  when  used  as  predicates,  and  their  ability  to 
take  certain  clitics  that  normally  appear  on  verbs,  such  as  -zhya’/-zhyi’, 
which indicates epistemic possibility: 

 
20.  Chòonn-zhyi’ bùunny m-nnàa lòo’-ng 
 
 

three-must      person   perf-see  face-3s.prox 
“Three men must have seen him”   
       (from Munro, course notes, 1997) 

 
Nouns  without  determiners  or  quantifiers  can  be  interpreted  as  either 
definite or indefinite entities, and either singular or plural. Thus, mni’ny, 
“child”,  can  mean,  depending  on  context  “a  child”,  “the  child”,  “(some) 
children”, or “the children”. Use of the plural marker ra  is purely optional.  
Relative clauses are head-initial. The relative marker nih appears obliga-

torily in non-interrogative restrictive relative clauses: 

student        rel   perf-see-at Pam      neut-exist here 
“The student that saw Pam/ that Pam saw is here”   

21.  Studya’aann nih b-inylohoh Pa’amm n-u’uh rèe’ 
 
 
 
Headless relatives also appear in SLQZ. They may be used as either free 
relatives, or, as in the example below, as coreferential with another argu-
ment in the sentence in which they appear: 

 
22.  Campesyenn n-àa       [nih b-zhyàag-a’ nài’] 
 
 
 
Possessive constructions are possessor-final. They are most com

farmer           neut-be    rel perf-meet-1s yesterday 
“The person I met yesterday is a farmer” 
 

formed  with  a  possessed  nominal  preceded  by  the  possessive  marker 
and followed by the possessor: 

 
23.  x:-ca’rr Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
Adjectives modifying the possessum appear between the possessum

poss-car Mike 
“Mike’s car” 

monly 
x:- 

 and 

the possessor: 

 
24.  x:-sabaad xniaa wgyee’ihzh-a’ 
 
 
 

poss-shoe red  expensive-1s 
“my expensive red shoe(s)” 

10      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

An alternate possessive construction, which apparently does not differ in 
usage or meaning from the one shown above, is formed with the “dummy” 
possessed nominal x:tèe’ or x:tèe’n : 

poss-student-1s 
“my student” 

 
25.  x:-studya’aann-a’ 
 
 
 
26.  studya’aann x:-tee’n-a’ 
 
 
 
SLQZ has a number of nouns that obligatorily appear with possessors. 
This group of nouns includes some body parts and certain other inalienably 
possessed  elements.  A  number  of  these  form  possessive  constructions 
without the possessive marker x:- : 

student        poss-nom-1s 
“My student” 

liahz-a’ 
home-1s 
“my home” 

 
27. 
 
 
 
28. 
 
 
 
Not all  nouns that can be considered inherently possessed semantically, 
however, necessarily appear in possessed form;  the SLQZ words da’ad, 
“father”, and nnaàan, “mother”, for instance, may appear without posses-
sors. 

ru’-a’ 
mouth-1s 
“my mouth” 

A small number of nouns (which are not inherently possessed) have ir-

regular forms in possessive constructions:       

 
29.  bèe’cw 
 
“dog” 
 
30.  x:-yèe’cw Gye’eihlly 
 
 

poss-dog   Mike 
“Mike’s dog” 

1.4.3  SLQZ Verbal Morphology 
SLQZ  verbs  can  take  complex  forms.  Besides  carrying  standard  inflec-
tional features (tense and agreement), they may also carry additional mor-
phological  material  encoding  direction,  causation,  manner,  and  modality, 
among other things. In this section, I will provide an overview of  these 
features.  I  will  begin  this  discussion  with  a detailed  description of  

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

11

the use and interpretation of SLQZ aspect markers, since this information 
will be crucial later in this work. 

 The SLQZ Aspect Markers and Their Uses 
SLQZ  expresses  tense  and  aspect    by  prefixing  one  of  seven  aspectual 
markers to the verb stem. Although I will follow longstanding tradition in 
Zapotec linguistics  and refer to these prefixes as “aspect” markers,3  these 
markers can also express tense and mood as well. SLQZ verbs obligatorily 
appear with aspect markers; bare verb stems are not used.  Six of the seven 
aspect markers are shown in boldface on the verb stem -tàa’az, “to beat”, 
in Table 3:     

    
aspect 

           -tàa’az “beat” 

 gloss 

Habitual 
Progressive 
Perfective 
Irrealis 
Subjunctive 
Definite 

rtàa’az 
catàa’az 
btàa’az 
ytàa’az 
ntàa’az 
stàa’az 

“beats (regularly)” 
“is beating” 
“beat” (past) 
“will beat” 
“was going to beat” 
“will definitely beat” 

Table 3. SLQZ aspect markers. 

The seventh aspect (the Neutral aspect, realized as the prefix n-) appears 

on a small number of mostly stative or locational verbs: 

neut-be-3s.prox old 
“He/she is old” 

 
31.  N-àa-ng           banguual 
 
 
 
32.  X:-nnàan-a’     n-u’uh    Sann Luu’c 
 
poss-mother-1s neut-exist San Lucas 
 
“My mother is in San Lucas” 
 
Most of these aspect markers have more than one allomorph:  the Per-
fective marker appears as  b- ,w-, or gu-; the Irrealis appears as either y , 
chi-,  g-,  or  l-;    the  Subjunctive  as  n-  or  ny-;  and  the  Definite  appears 
 
                                                      
3 This tradition is exemplified in Butler (1988), among others. A notable exception 
to this convention is Black (1994), who labels the verbal prefixes that encode  
only tense and aspect as “aspects”,  and those that also encode modal informa-
tion as “moods”. This distinction will be exploited later in this chapter, and will 
be described  in more theoretical terms in Chapter 5. 

12      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

as  either  s-  or  z-.  The  Definite  and  Subjunctive  allomorphs  are  
phonologically  conditioned  (the  Definite  marker  surfaces  as  s-  before 
voiceless-consonant-initial stems and appears as z-   elsewhere; the Sub-
junctive form n- appears before consonant-initial verb stems and appears 
as ny- elsewhere).  The allomorphs for Perfective and Irrealis aspect  are 
lexically selected by verbs.  

In  his  comparative  reconstruction  of  proto-Zapotec,  Kaufman  (1994)  
divides  verb stems into four classes corresponding to the set of aspectual 
allomorphs they select: transitive verbs beginning with /u/ or /e/ take the 
perfective  allomorph  /b/  while  consonant-initial  transitive  verbs  take  /g/;  
transitive or intransitive verbs beginning with sounds other than /p/ and /k/  
and  verbs  with  transitive/intransitive  (causative/versive)  alternations  take 
the same set of allomorphs. A similar classification system was proposed 
for Guevea de Humboldt Zapotec by Marks (undated ms.). Her classifica-
tion  system  differs  crucially  from  Kaufman’s  in  that  she  assumes  no  se-
mantic motivation for the different classes; aspectual allomorphs are either 
lexically selected or phonologically determined. I will not pursue this issue 
further. 

Linguists working on Zapotec have traditionally referred to the temporal 
prefixes  as  “aspect”  markers  because  they  overtly  convey  the  internal 
structure  of  events  rather  than  the  temporal  relation  to  the  speaker.  
A simple clause with a verb marked with progressive aspect, for instance, 
could be used to express a present, past, or future act in progress: 

prog-wait-1s you 
“I am/was/will be waiting for you”  

 
33.  Ca-beèz-a’ lìu’ 
 
 
 
Many of these markers, however,  also encode tense and modal informa-
tion. This  has been shown to be the case in other Zapotec languages as 
well. 

In  her  1994  dissertation  on  Quiegolani  Zapotec,  Cheryl  Black  divides 
the  aspect  markers  of  that  language  into  two  groups:      those  that denote 
purely temporal relations (aspect and tense),  which she labels “aspects”;  
and those that denote modality (the relation of events to sets of possible 
worlds),  which  she  labels  “moods”.  This  distinction  holds  in  SLQZ  
(although, as I show below, the aspect markers that denote modality can 
also behave non-modally and simply encode tense and aspect information). 
The division of SLQZ aspects into what I will call modal and non-modal 
groups is seen in Table 4: 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

13

 

Non-Modal Aspects 
Habitual           r- 
Perfective         b-, gu-, m-, w- 
Progressive      ca-, cay- 
Neutral            n-, Ø 

Modal Aspects 
Subjunctive     ny- 
Irrealis             y-, g-, ch-, l- 
Definite            z-, s- 
 

Table 4. Modal and  non-modal aspect  markers  in SLQZ. 

Uses of Non-Modal Aspects    
The functions of the four non-modal aspects are fairly straightforward.    

The habitual marker r, as its name implies, is used to denote ongoing  or 

regularly repeated states or events: 

 
34.  R-àa’p-a’      teihby li’ebr 
 
 
 
The progressive marker expresses immediately ongoing events or states, 

hab-have-1s one book 
“I have one book” 

    36.  Yzh:ii       chih   y-zëhnny-a’ al        b-da’uh Gye’eihlly 

tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike 
“When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten” 

 
 
 
The Perfective marker is also used to form affirmative singular impera-
tives.  In  this  imperative  structure,  no  subject  agreement  marker  appears. 
This in the one case in which the Perfective aspect serves a modal, rather 
than purely aspectual, function: 
 
37. 
 
 
 
The  Neutral  marker  n  (or  its  null  allomorph)  appears  on  only  a  small 
number  of  verbs,  which  are,  for  the  most  part,  stative  or  locational.  

B-da’uh! 
perf-eat 
Eat! 
 

as seen in (33). 

The Perfective marker is used to denote completed actions (either com-

pleted in the past or in the future): 

 
35.  B-guhty-a’ bzihny 
perf-kill-1s mouse 
 
 
“I killed a mouse” 
 

14      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Among these are ru’uh,4  “exist”, and nàa, “be”,  verbs denoting temporary 
states  (ra’tga’ah,  “lies  down”),  and  verbs  denoting  knowledge  (naann, 
“know”): 

 
 38.   Me’s    n-àa      Jwaany 
 
 

teacher neut-be Juan 
“Juan is a teacher” 

Uses of Modal Aspects    
The modal aspects show a wider and more complex range of possible in-
terpretations than the non-modal ones. These interpretations include non-
modal as well as modal readings. In this section, I will provide a brief de-
scriptive overview of the possible interpretations of each of the modal as-
pects. A direct correlation between the modal and non-modal readings of 
these aspects will be proposed and argued for in Chapter 6. 

In  this  chapter,  I  assume  informal  definitions  of  “modal”  and  “non-
modal”.  “Non-modal”,  for  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  are  those  in 
which  the  event  described  is  taken  to  occur  in  the  actual  world  of  the 
speaker and listener. 

irr-sell    Mike      car 
“Mike will sell the car” 

An example of a non-modal reading can be seen in (39): 
39.  Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
In (39)  the verb “sell” refers to an event assumed to take place at a later 
time in the actual world containing Mike and the speaker. The proposition 
of Mike selling the car at a later time is presumed to be a real event in the 
real world: the speaker would not have uttered this sentence if she or he 
did not believe it would be true that Mike would sell his car. This is thus a 
case in which one of SLQZ’s modal aspects (the Irrealis) receives a non-
modal interpretation. 

 I will define “modal” readings here as those expressing the relationship 
between  an event and the actual world of the speaker and listener. An ex-
ample  of  a  modal  reading  of  the  Irrealis  aspect  is  its  interpretation  as  a 
complement of “want” in (40): 

 

 
40. 
 
 
  

R-càa’z   y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
hab-want irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike wants to sell the car” 

 
 
                                                      
4  Following  the  convention  set  forth  in  the  SLQZ  dictionary,  I  cite  verbs  in  
isolation with the habitual marker r-, except in cases such as nàa, “be”, where 
no habitual form exists. 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

15

     In (40), the event of Mike selling the car does not take place the actual 
world in which Mike exists (since it’s a potential, rather than actual, event)  
but  rather  in  the  set  of  possible  worlds  denoted by Mike’s desire. In 
contrast to (39) above, in which the event of Mike selling the car at some 
future  time  is  presumed  to  be true, in this case, the event is expressed as 
possible, but the speaker and listener are not committed to believing it will
 (or won’t ) actually take place. 

These  admittedly  sketchy  definitions  will  be  refined  and  elaborated 
upon in Chapter 5. Now I return to the description of the distribution and 
interpretation of the three modal aspects. 

The examples above showed two of the most common uses  of the
alis aspect.  In matrix clauses, it is used to express future events, as seen

 Irre
 in (39) above and (41) below:   

     
41.  Y-da’uhw-ënn gueht 
 
 
 
 It is also used in complement clauses of intensional verbs  and in em-

irr-eat-1p tortilla 
“We will eat tortillas” 

 

 
 
 
 

bedded imperatives: 

 
42.  R-càa’z-a’    y-guhty-a’ bzihny 
 
 
 

hab-want- s irr-kill-1s mouse 
“I want to kill the mouse” 

1

    43.  R-e’ihpy-a’ Gye’eihlly  y-tòo’oh ca’rr 

neut-be for     irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike has to sell the car” 

hab-tell-1s Mike      irr-sell  car 
“I told Mike to sell the car” 

 
 
 
It also appears in the complements of certain modals: 
 
44.  N-àa      pahr   y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly  ca’rr 
 
 
 
45.  Z-àa’lle’eh g-uuny bùunny nadaar rèe’ 
def-allow    irr-do    person   swim  here 
 
 
“Swimming is allowed here” 
 
It is worth noting that the contexts in which Irrealis verbs receive modal 
readings in SLQZ are closely parallel to those in which subjunctive mark-
ing is assigned to verbs in Romance (and other) languages. 

16      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

   The  Definite  aspect  is  most  commonly  used  instead of  the Irrealis 
aspect  to  express  strong speaker presupposition about the occurrence of a 
future event.  By  using  the  Definite aspect, the speaker expresses a belief 
that an event will “definitely” happen; thus, the name given to this aspect: 
 
46. 
 
 
 

Z-u’uh  cla’s Myee’rcw 
def-exist class Wednesday 
“There will (definitely) be class Wednesday 

This is the usual usage of Definite verbs in matrix clauses. 

  Besides their stronger implication of speaker presupposition, Definite 
verbs  also  differ from Irrealis verbs in their syntactic distribution.  Most  
notably, while verbs with other aspects freely allow preverbal subjects or 
objects with contrastive focus readings (as seen in (1) and (2)), verbs with 
Definite aspect generally disallow preverbal arguments: 

def-beat Mike Felipe 
“Mike will definitely beat Felipe” 

 
47.  S-tàa’az Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
 
 
 
48.  *Gye’eihlly s-tàa’az Li’eb 
Mike           def-beat Felipe 
 
 
“Mike will definitely beat Felipe” 
 
A syntactic and semantic account for this asymmetry will be presented 

in Chapters 4 and 5. 

The presence of two distinct aspect markers, distinguished by syntactic 
behavior,  to  express  future  events  is  also  attested  in  Quiegolani  Zapotec 
(hereafter, QZ) (Black 2004). In QZ, the two aspects that can be used to 
describe  future  events  (which  Black  labels  “Future”  and  “Potential”)  are 
virtually  interchangeable  semantically;  Black  reports  that  either  can  be 
used  in  future  contexts  with  no  change  in  meaning.  There  are,  however, 
distributional  constraints  that  distinguish  the  QZ  Potential  and  Future 
aspects.  While verbs  with  Future  aspect  (which appears cognate with 
SLQZ Definite  aspect)  may  appear  in  QZ  yes/no  questions,  verbs  marked 
with 
Potential aspect  (which appears cognate with SLQZ Irrealis aspect) 
may not: 

Q fut-drink 2s water 
“Will you drink water?” 

 
49.  Pe s-oo de nis 
 
 
 
50  *Pe g-oo de nis 
 
 
 

Q  pot-drink 2s water 
“Will you drink water?”  
(Quiegolani Zapotec: Black 2004) 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

17

A similar constraint distinguishes SLQZ Definite and Irrealis aspects. In 
contrast to QZ, which has a single construction for yes/no questions, SLQZ 
has three distinct yes/no question particles: 

exist   who perf-eat yesterday Q 
“Did anyone eat yesterday?” 

Q     exist   who perf-eat yesterday 
“Did anyone eat yesterday?” 

 
51.  Nu’uh tu b-da’uh nài’ èee? 
 
 
 
52.  Làa’ nu’uh tu b-da’uh nài’? 
 
 
 
53.  Uu   nu’uh tu b-da’uh nài’? 
 
 
 
A  detailed  account  of  these  markers  will  be  presented  in  Chapter  5. 
(SLQZ also has a number of particles that form tag questions, which I do 
not include here). 

Q     exist   who perf-eat yesterday 
“Did anyone eat yesterday?” 

The  last  of  the  question  particles  cited  above,  uu,  differs  most  clearly 
from the others in distribution and meaning. While èee and làa’  are used 
when the speaker asking the question is genuinely unsure of the answer, 
use of uu  implies that the speaker is already presupposing a positive an-
swer, and is simply asking for this presupposition to be confirmed. Also, 
while verbs with both Irrealis and Definite aspect may appear in questions 
with èee and làa’, Irrealis verbs may not appear in uu  questions: 

Q   def-eat-2s.inf. meat 
“Will you eat meat?” 

 
54.  Uu z-a’uw-u’ beèe’l? 
 
 
 
55.  *Uu g-a’uw-u’ beèe’l? 
Q   irr-eat-2s.inf. meat 
 
 
“Will you eat meat?” 
 
Thus, the Definite and Irrealis aspects differ in not only interpretation, 

but syntactic distribution. 

Verbs with Definite marking can also appear as complements of certain 
verbs.  In  some  cases,  these  complement  verbs  may  appear  with  either 
Definite  or  Irrealis  aspect.  The  choice  of  aspect  in  these  cases  lends 
slightly different interpretations to the sentence:    

 
56.  R-ralloh Li’eb       s-tòo’oh/*y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 

hab believe Felipe def-sell/*irr-sell Mike car 
“Felipe thinks Mike will sell the car” 

 

 

18      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

perf-hear    Felipe   def-sell/irr-sell  Mike car 
“Felipe heard that Mike will sell the car” 

57.  B-inydiahg Li’eb   s-tòo’oh/y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
In  (56),  use  of  the  Definite  aspect  in  the  complement  clause  means 
Felipe is sure that Mike will sell the car; use of the Irrealis in (57), on the 
other  hand,  means  Felipe  heard  that   Mike  will  sell  the  car  but  is  not 
ne

cesssarily committed to believing the truth of this proposition. 
It is interesting to note that the verbs that select Definite versus Irrealis 
complements to express future events correspond closely to those that  se-
lect indicative versus subjunctive complements in other languages, such as 
the Romance languages.  

In  a  small  number  of  verbs  (mostly  verbs  of  motion),  Definite  allo-
morphs  may  be  used  instead  of  Perfective  to  express  past  actions  or 
events:5 

neg hab-believe-neg-1s    def-go-3s.prox Mexico 
“I don’t believe he went to Mexico” 

neg hab-believe-neg-1s    perf-go-3s.prox  Mexico 
“I don’t believe he went to Mexico” 

 
58.  Cë’ity r-ielldyalàa’z-dy-a’ gw-èe-ng Me’ijy 
 
 
 
59.  Cë’ity r-ielldyalàa’z-dy-a’ z-èe-ng Me’ijy 
 
 
 
There is a slight difference in presupposition implied by the choice of 
Perfective or Definite aspect in these contexts:  (58) would be used if the 
person under discussion were already back from some trip and the speaker 
didn’t believe he ever went to Mexico. (59), in contrast, would be used if 
the person under discussion were still gone, and the speaker didn’t believe 
he’s currently in Mexico.6 

The  Subjunctive  aspect  is  not  frequently  used  in  matrix  clauses,  but 

when it does appear, it  expresses incompleted past actions: 

subj-sell Mike car 
“Mike was going to sell the car (but didn’t)” 

 
60.  N-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly c’arr 
 
 
It is often used instead of the Perfective in negative statements or ques-
tions  with  past    readings.  Although  Perfective  verbs  may  appear  with 
clausal  negation  and  in  negative  questions,  my  consultant  consistently 
volunteers Subjunctive forms first in these contexts: 
 
 
                                                      
5 Black (2004)  proposes that this z- prefix, which appears on  a small number of 
motion verbs in a number of Zapotec  languages, is not a Definite allomorph at 
all but a  distinct marker denoting actions in progress. 

 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

19

neg  subj-sell-neg Mike   car 
“Mike didn’t sell the car” 

61.  Cë’ity n-tòo’oh-dya’ Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
There  seems  to  be  no  clear  semantic  difference  between  the  negated 

variants with Subjunctive versus Perfective aspect. 

The Subjunctive aspect also appears as the complement  of modals and 

 

intensional verbs with Perfective aspect to obtain past-tense readings:     

neut-be for   subj-hit-1s Felipe 
“I should have hit Felipe” 

perf-want-1s subj-beat-1s Felipe 
“I wanted to beat Felipe” 

   
62.  G-uhclaaz-a’ n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb 
 
 
 
63.  N-àa    pahr n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb 
 
 
 
64.  Cë’ity n-àa-dya’ pahr n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb 
 
neg neut-be-neg for subj-hit-1s Felipe 
 
“I shouldn’t have hit Felipe” 
 
The Subjunctive, then, appears to serve as the past-tense form of the Ir-
realis  in  complement  clauses.  This  shows  clearly  the  existence  of  tense-
shifting in SLQZ, and thus the necessity of recognizing tense as well as as-
pect as part of SLQZ’s syntactic system. 

The modal aspects can thus be summarized as follows: the Subjunctive 
aspect marker seems to express actions that are incomplete in relation to a 
past reference time, the Irrealis aspect marker expresses actions that are in-
complete in relation to a present reference time, and the Definite marker 
expresses highly possible events in the future.  

To sum up, the modal and non-modal aspects in general can be distin-
guished in the following ways: The non-modal aspects denote events ex-
tensionally anchored to the actual world, while modal aspects may refer to 
hypothetical or potential, rather than actual, events. The non-modal aspects 
generally keep the same interpretation in all syntactic environments, while 
the  modal  aspects  can  vary  in  meaning  in  different  environments.  In  the 
following  chapters,  I  will  develop  and  show  evidence  for  a  structural  
account for these contrasts. 
1.4.4   Pronouns and  Pronominal Clitics 
Pronominal subjects appear as clitics that  follow the verb stem.  

SLQZ has no subject agreement morphology for non-pronominal (that 
is,  lexical,  clausal,  wh-word,  or  quantificational)  subjects.  This  is  one  of 
the  reasons  the  forms  listed  below  are  considered  pronominal  arguments 
themselves, rather than agreement markers. 
 

 

20      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

ML list 18 possible clitics for pronominal subjects in SLQZ: 

 

Person/Number 
1s 
1p 
3s proximate 
3p proximate  
3s distal 
3p distal 
3s animal 
3p animal 
2s informal 
2p informal 
3s respectful 
3p respectful 
2s formal 
2p formal 
3s formal 
3p formal 
3s reverential 
3p reverential 

Clitic  
bìi’llya’   
bìi’llyënn 
bìi’llyëng 
bìi’llyrëng 
bìi’llyih 
bìi’llyrih 
bìi’llyëmm 
bìi’llyrëmm 
bìi’llyu’ 
bìi’llyahd 
bìi’llyahzh: 
bìi’llyrahzh: 
bìi’llyyëbu’ 
bìi’llyyëbud 
bìi’llyëb 
bìi’llyrëb 
bìi’llyiny 
bìi’llyriny 

Gloss 
“I read” 
 “we read” 
“he/she/it (nearby) read” 
“they (nearby) read” 
“he/she (out of sight) read” 
“they (out of sight) read” 
“he/she/it(animal/child) read” 
“they (animals/children) read” 
“you (informal)read” 
“you (plural, informal) read” 
“he/she (respectful) read” 
“they (respectful) read” 
“you  (formal) read” 
“you (plural, formal) read” 
“he/she (formal) read” 
“they (formal) read” 
“he (God) read” 
“they (gods/saints) read” 

Table 5. Pronominal subject clitics (on Perfective form of “read”). 
 

ML  observe  (as  shown  above)  that  SLQZ  third-person  pronouns  
four  distinct  levels  of  reference  to  living  beings,  depending  on  age  and  
social status. Two other forms of reference, the distal and proximate, are 
determined  by  the  proximity  of  the  referent  to  the  speaker:  pronomi- 
nal  subjects  the  speaker  can  see  at  the  time  of  utterance  are  expressed  
with  the  proximate  forms;  those  that  are  out  of  the  speaker’s  sight  are  
expressed  with  the  distal  forms.  These  forms  can  be  used  to  refer  to  
both  people  and  inanimate  objects.  The  usage  of  the  remaining  forms  is  
determined by the social standing of the speaker and the referent in the  
 
 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

21

community.  (First- person  subject  agreement  markers  are  not  explicitly 
marked for proximity or social level; second-person pronouns show a two-
way  distinction:  formal  and  informal.)  The  third-person  animal  form  is 
used to refer to animals and children;  the respectful form is used to refer 
to people who have reached adulthood or who have proven themselves ca-
pable of doing the work of an adult: even adults can be referred to with the 
animal forms if they are thought not to have met the normal requirements 
of adulthood (Pam Munro (class lectures) reports Felipe Lopez’s observa-
tion that even an older woman who has never married can be referred to 
with the animal form,)  The formal form is used to refer older people or 
those with higher social standing, and the reverential form is used in refer-
ence  to  God,  saints,  particularly  salient  natural  entities  (such  as  the  sun, 
moon, and water), and physical entities with special cultural salience (such 
as tortillas).  

The singular reverential form is also used as a grammatical subject in a 

number of subjectless, idiomatic constructions (P. Munro, p.c.): 
65.  B-làiny                         primeer gw’eell b-dèèi’dyiag-a’ 
 
 
 
 
In  these  constructions,  no  other  lexical  or  pronominal subject is 

perf-be.fortunate-3s rev.  first     time     perf-cross-1s 
“It was fortunate that I crossed the first time”          
(from ML) 

 

possi

ble. 

SLQZ  lacks object agreement as well as subject agreement. Pronominal 
objects  are  expressed  in  one  of  two  ways:  with  a  separate  series  of  
morphologically independent pronouns or with one of the clitic forms 
described above.  

Pronominal object clitics follow subject clitics at the right edge of the 
verb  stem  (66).  If  the  subject  is  lexical,  the  object  clitic  cliticizes  to  the 
subject (67): 

Li’eb 
perf-give-1s.-3s.prox  Felipe 
“I gave it to Felipe” 

 
66.  B- dêêi’dy-a’-ng 
 
 
 
67.  B-tòo’ Crisy-ëng 
 
 
 
The morphologically independent pronouns are shown in Table 6. Note 
that the independent pronoun forms (with the exception of the first-person 
forms)  can  be  analyzed  as  combinations  of  a  base  form  laa    (which  has 
been analyzed as a focus particle) and a bound subject clitic:7 

perf-sell Cris-3s.prox 
“Cris sold it” 

                                                      
7  See  Lee  1995  for  evidence  that  fronted  independent    pronouns  are  multimor-

phemic, and that constructions with fronted independent pronouns are clefts. 

22      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Person/Number 
1s 
1p 
3s proximate 
3p proximate 
3s distal 
3p distal 
3s animal 
3p animal 
2s informal 
2p informal 
3s respectful 
3p respectful 
2s formal 
2p formal 
3s formal 
3p formal 
3s reverent. 
3p reverent. 
 

                        Independent Pronoun  
 
 
 

nàa’ 
dannoohnn 
la’anng 
                        làa’rëng 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

la’ai 
làa’rih 
làa’mm 
làa’rëmm 
liu’ 
làa’d 
làa’zh: 
làa’razh: 
làa’yuu 
làa’yuad 
làa’b 
làa’rëb 
làa’iny 
làa’riny 

Table 6. Independent  pronouns  in SLQZ. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Independent pronouns may be used as both direct and indirect objects: 
 
68.  Y-dêêi’dy-a’ buhdy la’anng 
 
irr-give-1s chicken 3s.prox 
 
“I will give him a chicken” 
 
69.  R-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly la’anng.  

Hab-like Mike 3s.prox  
“Mike likes him/her” 

 

    
 

 
 
 
 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

23

   These independent pronoun forms may also be used as emphatic subjects 
with  focused  readings.  In  this  capacity,  they  (1)  must  co-occur  with  a  
corresponding  bound  subject  clitic  with  the  same  person/number  and  
formality features,  and (2) may only appear in preverbal, not postverbal,  
position: 

3s.prox. prog-visit-3s.prox Mexico 
“HE is visiting Mexico” (ML vol 1, p. 23) 
 

 
70.  La’anng  ca-nzàa-ng Meijy 
 
 
 
71.  *Ca-nzàa-ng la’anng Meijy 
 
A  second,  less  frequently  used  series  of  independent  pronouns,  called 
“nominal pronouns” by ML, also exists: These are used only as subjects, 
occur only in third person, and like the ordinary independent subject pro-
nouns, may appear only preverbally. They differ from other independent 
pronouns in that they appear without any corresponding subject clitic on 
the verb stem.  Compare the following example to (70): 

 
72.  A’anng ca-nzàa          Meijy 
 
 
 
Nominal pronouns consist of a base àa’  followed by one of the twelve 

3s.prox.nom prog-visit Mexico 
“He is visiting Mexico” 

third-person clitic forms, as seen in Table 7. 

The  precise  semantic  contexts  in  which  these  forms  are  used  is  still  
unclear.    ML  note  that  they  tend  to  appear  in  single-clause  sentences 
containing locational or movement verbs, and in some cases seem to have 
some  demonstrative  force.  One  of  my  speakers  sometimes  feels  they  fit 
best  in  contexts  describing  a  known  subject:  thus,  they  have a topic-like 
function. This remains an issue for future investigation. 

A number of other elements may also be affixed to the verb stem. These 

may appear affixed to either the left or right edge of the verbal stem. 

 
 

1.4.5   Preverbal Affixes 
Many SLQZ verbs have causative alternates. These forms, which I will call 
“morphological causatives”, are formed by either the addition of a causa-
tive morpheme or a suppletive alternation at the left edge of the verb stem, 
following the subject agreement marker: 

 

24      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

    Person/Number 
3s. proximate 
3p. proximate 
3s. distal 

3p. distal 
3s. animal 
3p. animal 
3s. respectful 
3p. respectful 
3s. formal 
3p. formal 
3s. reverential 
3p. reverential 
 

Table 7. SLQZ nominal pronouns. 

Nominal Pronoun 
a’anng 
arëng 
a’ai 

arih 
a’mm 
arëmm 
a’àzh: 
arahzh 
àab 
arëb 
àiny 
ariny 

r-ihnnih 
hab-gets light 
“gets light” (of the sky, before dawn) 

 
 
73. 
 
 
   
74. 
 
     
 
75. 
 
 
76. 
 
 
 
 (SLQZ  also  has  a  periphrastic  causative construction formed with the 

r-z-ihnnih 
hab-caus-gets.light 
“turns on (a light)” 
r-yiuh  
hab-gets ground 
“gets ground up” 
r-z-iuh  
hab-caus-gets ground 
“grinds up, pulverizes” 

verb ruhny, “make” with a sentential complement.) 

The actual forms of the morphological causative marker are fairly var-
ied. The most common forms are z-, gu-, gw-, and fortition of root-initial 
lenis consonants. Examples of  these are shown below: 

 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

25

rgàa’ah  
“gets caught” 

rgwèe’d 
“braids  (hair)” 

 
80. 
 
 
Causative with fortition of lenis consonant: 
81. 
 
 
82. 
 
 
Another set of elements that may precede verb stems in SLQZ are direc-
tional  markers.  These  markers,  reduced  forms  of  the  verbs  “come”  and 
“go”, give the meanings “comes to V” and “goes to V”, respectively : 

rcàa’ah  
“takes, gets” 

  rèe’cy 
 “burns” (intr.) 

Causative with z-: 
77. 
    
 
78. 
  
 
Causative with gw-: 
79. 

rzèe’cy 
“burns” (trans.) 

rìe’d 
“gets braided” (of hair) 

rgye’eht 
 “plays” 
ri’cye’eht  
“goes to play” 
ra’uh  
“eats” 

 
83. 
 
 
84. 
 
 
85. 
 
 
86. 
 
87. 
       “goes to eat” 

ri’dta’u 
“comes to eat” 
ri’ta’u 

 

26      1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Directional markers precede morphological causative stems: 

88.  Z-ied- sya’a’ Li’eb Gye’eihlly 
 
 

def-come-make.dance Felipe Mike 
“Felipe came to make Mike dance” 

1.4.6   Postverbal Affixes 
A larger, more varied set of elements may follow the verb stem in SLQZ. 
Some of the more common ones are shown below. Munro 1997 notes that 
postverbal affixes fall into two basic groups:  those that appear directly ad-
jacent to the verb stem and behave like part of the verb stem , which she 
calls  “secondary  roots”,  and  postverbal  clitics,  which  appear  to  form  a 
phonological unit with the verb stem, but not be closely attached syntacti-
cally. Secondary roots also differ from clitics in their syntactic distribution: 
they may only affix to verbs, while there are a large number of clitics that 
may  cliticize  to  both  verbs  and  other  constituents,  such  as  prepositional 
phrases and nominals. The postverbal clitics themselves fall into a number 
of different groups depending on their usage and distribution; their gram-
mar is quite complex, and I will not attempt a full description of these ele-
ments. Rather, I will give a few examples of their more typical usage. 
The  applicative  morpheme  nèe  is  the  most  common  of  the  secondary 
roots.  It  may  appear  directly  after  the  verb  root  and  before  the  subject 
agreement marker. Nèe increases the valance of the verb and allows the in-
troduction of an indirect object: 

 
89.  B-da’uh-a’ rro’s 
 
perf-eat-1s rice  
 
“I ate rice” 
 
90.  B-da’uh-nì -a’ Gye’eihlly rro’s 
 
 
 
(where /e/ becomes [i] before a low vowel) 
Another postverbal particle that behaves similarly is daààn, an intensi-
fier that is usually glossed  as “ a lot”. Like -nèe ,  it appears directly adja-
cent to the verb stem: 

perf-eat-app-1s Mike rice 
“I ate rice with Mike” 

 
91.  R-a’uw-daàa’n Gye’eihlly bx:àady    
 
hab-eat-a.lot Mike        grasshopper 
 
“Mike eats a lot of grasshoppers.” 
 
It may not co-occur with -nèe  in a verbal complex: 
 
92.  *B-da’uw-daàa’n-nèe Gye’eihlly Li’eb bx:àady 
perf-eat-a.lot-appl    Mike   Felipe grasshopper 
 
 
“Mike ate a lot of grasshoppers with Felipe” 

1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Gramm r a

27

 
93.  *B-da’uw-nèe-daàa’n Gye’eihlly Li’eb bx:àady 
 
On  the  assumption  that  productive  word  formation  processes  occur  at 
the syntactic level, this suggests the possibility that daàa’n and nèe  oc-
cupy the same syntactic position. This possibility will be discussed in the 
next chapter. 

Other  morphemes  (generally  aspectual  adverbs  and  expressions  of  
probability) may appear after the verb root (and after secondary roots, if 
present)  but before the subject agreement marker.  SLQZ has a large in-
ventory of such morphemes (in contrast to other Zapotec languages, such 
as  Quiegolani  Zapotec  (Black  2004),  which  has  only  two  such  possible 
morphemes). A few examples of  postverbal markers in SLQZ appear be-
low.  These  do  not  represent  an  exhaustive  listing  of  possible  postverbal 
suffixes: 

neut-exist-still-might-3p.prox Los Angeles 
“They might still be in Los Angeles” 

 
94.  N-u’u-g-zhya-rëng Los Angl 
 
 
 
95.  Ca-ya’uh-ru-zhya-rëng gueht 
 
 
 
-Zhya’   expresses epistemic probability; I have thus glossed it  “might” 
in  the  examples above. As the preceding examples show, more than one 
adverbial expression may attach to a verb. They always appear, however, 
in fixed order in relation to each other:-zhya’ , for instance, always follows 
adverbial morphemes such as -ag, “still”, and -ru’, “more”. 

prog-eat-more-might-3p.prox tortillas 
“They might be eating more tortillas” 

In summary, then, the template for possible ordering of morphemes on 

SLQZ verb roots is as follows: 

 
ASP (dir.)(causative) ROOT (sec. root)(adv.)(adv.)(SAM)(Obj.clitic) 
 
In  Chapter  3,  I    show  that  this  ordering  of  verbal  morphemes  poses 
problems for generally accepted theories on verb movement and how mor-
pheme order reflects underlying syntactic structure. 

 2  Background and Theoretical 

Assumptions 

2.1  Overview 

This chapter addresses the historical and theoretical proposals  assumed in 
this work. Because the central focus of this book is an alternative deriva-
tion of VSO word order and its consequences for the syntax of SLQZ and 
other VSO languages, this chapter summarizes some of the previous pro-
posals  about the derivation of VSO languages, and shows  (1) the features 
of VSO languages (including SLQZ) that they attempt to address and (2) 
how these proposals all fail to account for the word order and morphologi-
cal  ordering  facts  of  SLQZ. Then,  I  briefly  summarize  Kayne s  (1994) 
tisymmetry  program,  which  forms  the theoretical basis for this work. I 
An
assume  Kayne s   definitions   for  most   of   the  technical  terms  (such  as 
“c-command” and “adjunction”) used in the rest of this work.  

,

,

 

2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived? Some 

1
Previous Accounts

 

The question of how VSO word order is derived has long been debated by 
linguists.  This section briefly summarizes some of the earlier proposals for 
deriving  VSO  word  order,  and  considers  their  possible  applications  to 
SLQZ. I then show that there is strong theoretical and empirical evidence 
that an alternative derivation for VSO word order is needed to account for 
the  word  order  constraints  and  morphological  ordering  constraints  of 
SLQZ. 
 

                                                      
1 Much of the following section is based on the extremely comprehensive review 

of VSO literature in Carnie 1995. 

30      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

2.2.1   VSO as a Distinct Derivation: Flat Structures 
The earliest accounts of VSO syntactic structure in a generative framework 
assumed  an  underlying  structure  distinct  from 
that  of  SVO  and  
various  other  language  types.  These  accounts  (Awberry  1976,  Chung 
1976,    among  others)  assumed  that  VSO  languages  had  verbs,  but  not  
VPs. The structures were assumed to be flat: 

 
1.     
 
 S 

V   NP    NP 
Justification for this structure came from the assumption that since verbs 
and objects are not contiguous in VSO languages, they cannot form a dis-
tinct syntactic constituent. Under the assumption that VSO languages are 
derived  from  structures  such  as  (1),  verbs  and  objects  in  VSO  lan-
guages should not be able to appear together as syntactic units, andshould 
not be able to undergo movement or other syntactic processes as a unit. 

This prediction, however, is not borne out.  It has been widely noted that  
some VSO languages (such as the Celtic languages) allow verbs and their 
in  
objects 
Carnie (1995), p. 40):  
 

following  examples  are  cited 

to  be  clefted2 

(the 

’

see    the dog wh be-the man 
“It’s seeing the dog that the man is” (Welsh, from Sproat 1985) 

2.  Gweld y ci y mae r dyn 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
 
 
This suggests that, at least in the Celtic languages, verbs and objects do 

Lenn     eul      levr brezhoneg  a ran     bembez 
to-read a book breton              wh do-I every day 
“Read a Breton book is what I do every day  
(Breton, from Anderson and Chung 1977) 

indeed form constituents – that is, VPs – that may undergo movement. 

Further  evidence  against  flat  structures  for  VSO  languages  comes  
from  subject/object  asymmetries  in  binding  relations.  If  subjects  and  
objects  are  indeed  sisters  dominated  by  the  same  node  (as  seen  in  the  
tree  above),  they  should  be  able  to  enter  freely  into  binding  relations  
with  each  other,  since  they  are  mutually  c-commanding.  This,  however, 
proves  not  to  be  the  case:      Carnie  (1995),  citing  work  by  Woolford  
 
 
                                                      
2 These languages are a notable exceptions to the general crosslinguistic prohibi-
tion  against  clefted  predicates    (Heggie  1988,  McCawley  1988).  SLQZ  also 
prohibits clefted predicates (Lee 1997b). 

 

                                     
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived?

              31  

        

cedents: 

(1991), notes that Niuean allows reflexive objects to take pronominal 
ante
 
4. 
         shoot empf-erg him abs. him refl yesterday 
 

Fana n-e                ia   a     ia ni    neafi 

“He shot himself yesterday”   
(Seiter 1981, p. 80, cited in Woolford 1991) 
 

,

, 

If  it  were  the  case  that  VSO  structures  were  flat,  then  this  sentence 
would  be  ungrammatical:  if  the  object    “himself”  were  allowed  to  c-
command the subject “him”, then a violation of Principle B of the Binding 
Theory would result. Since this sentence is grammatical, however, it can-
not  be  the  case  that  the  object  and  subject    mutually  c-command  each 
other. 

Similar subject/object asymmetries also occur in SLQZ. The following 
examples  show  subject/object  asymmetries  with  the  reflexive  possessive 
marker -ni . -Ni   marks nominals to indicate their possession by a preced-
ing,  non-pronominal  nominal.   In  simple  VSO  sentences,  possessed 
ob
 

,
jects, but not subjects, may be marked with  -ni  : 

perf-hit Mike         brother-refl.poss. 
“Mikei hit hisi  brother” 

5.  Gw-àa izy Gye eihlly be ts-ni                
 
 
 
6. 
 
 
 
This  clearly  shows  that  subjects  and  objects  are  not  in  a  symmetric  
relation with each other in either SLQZ or Niuean, and suggests  that VSO 
word order involves more hierarchy than the flat structure in (1) presumes. 
 

*Gw-àa izy be ts-ni  Gye eihlly  
perf-hit   brother-refl.poss Mike 
“Hisi brother hit  Mikei”    

3

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

                                                      
3  See Munro (1995) for a detailed description of the distribution and usage of -ni . 

 
 

’
32      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

 

2.2.2   VSO Derived from SVO: An Overview 4
Later  alternatives  to  the  flat  structure  are  based  on  the  assumption  that 
VSO  word  order  is  derived  from  SVO  word  order  by  additional  move- 
ment  (either  movement  of  the  verb  to  the  left  of  the  subject,    as  pro- 
posed  by    Emonds  1980,  among  others);  or  movement  of  the  subject  to  
the  right  of  the  verb  (as  suggested  by  Choe  1987  and  Chung  1990);    or  
less  movement    (assuming  subjects  are  generated  VP-internally,  subjects 
may  potentially  remain  situ  in  VP  while  the  verb  itself  raises  to  the  left  
of  the  subject  to  the  inflectional  position  in  which  verbs  normally  sur- 
face in SVO languages (Koopman and Sportiche 1991)). 

2.2.3 VSO Derived by Verb Raising 
Emonds  (1980)  argues  that  the  typological  facts  of  VSO  languages 
support  the  idea  that  they  are  derived  by  verb  raising  to  a  complemen- 
tizer position, as  seen below: 

 

 
7.      

CP

C’

IP

         

C
 V 

DP

subj 

I’

 I  
tv

 VP 

V’

 
 V
 tv

DP

obj

 

 

 
 

,

 
    In  support  of  this  thesis,  Emonds  cites  Greenberg s  Sixth  Universal 
(1966),  which  claims  that  all  VSO  languages  also  have  alternate  SVO 
word order, and his Twelfth Universal, which asserts that languages with  
 
                                                      
4  A  number  of  the  following  alternate  proposals  for  deriving  VSO  word  order 
were developed before Pollock s (1989) idea (which I have assumed throughout 
this work) that verbal inflectional material is contained in separate functional 
projections including tense (TP) and agreement (AgrP). Rather, they follow the 
older assumption that all inflectional information is contained in a single func-
tional projection I(inflection) P. In summarizing these proposals, I will use the 
terminology of the original work. 

,

 

                                     
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived?

              

33  

predominant VSO word order have clause-initial question particles, while 
languages with predominant SOV word order do not. Emonds thus associ-
ates  VSO  word  order  with  the  presence  of  clause-initial  particles,  which 
motivate verb movement to pre-subject position.  The alternate SVO word 
order available to predominantly VSO languages results from the absence 
of verb movement. 

Parallels have also been drawn between the derivation of VSO word or-
der  by  verb  movement  from  I  to  C  and  verb-second  languages  such  as 
German,  which  have  been  analysed  as  requiring  obligatorily  filled  com-
plementizer positions (Den Besten 1983, among others). In matrix clauses, 
for instance, German verbs raise obligatorily to C, and another constituent 
(such as an argument or an adverb) raises to a preverbal Topic position :  

 
8.  Gestern kaufte Karl dieses Buch 
 
yesterday bought  Karl  this book 
 
“Karl bought this book yesterday” 
 
In    clauses  containing  overt  complementizers,  however,  verbs  appear 

(Carnie 1995, p. 60) 

clause-finally: 

Ich dachte [dass Karl gestern das Buch gekauft hat] 
I    thought [that Karl  yesterday the book bought has] 
“I thought that Karl bought the book yesterday”   

 
9. 
 
 
        (Carnie 1995, p. 60) 
The  complementary  distribution  between  overt  complementizers  and 
verbs in second position is seen as evidence that verbs in second position 
land in C. The presence of overt complementizers blocks this movement, 
thus deriving the verb-final construction in (9). 

VSO  languages  have  thus  been  argued  to  be  “weak” verb-second lan-
guages: like verb-second languages such as German, they require verbs to 
raise from I to C, but unlike German, they do not require the specifier of 
CP to be filled. 

This  proposal,  however,  fails  to  account  for    the  word  order  facts  of 
SLQZ. While SLQZ does not use complementizers to introduce embedded 
clauses, it does require complementizers in relative clauses.5 The following 
analysis will thus use relative clauses as a diagnostic for the possibility of 
verb-raising to C in SLQZ. Relative clauses in SLQZ, which obligatorily 
contain complementizers, still allow VSO word order and actually disallow 
SVO order: 

                                                      
5 Pamela Munro (p,c,) and Gallant 1995 argue that the SLQZ relative marker nih 

is indeed a complementizer rather than a relative pronoun.  

  

34      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

’

’

’

student    rel perf-give Mike book 
“the student Mike gave the book  to”  

10.  Studya aann nih b-dêidy Gye eihlly li ebr  
 
 
 
11.  * Studya aann nih Gye eihlly b-dêidy  li ebr 
 
This  suggests  that  verbs  do  not  raise  as  high  as  C  in  SLQZ  relative 
clauses.  (The  possibility  of  VSO  word  order  within  relative  clauses  has 
also been attested in Irish, cf. Koopman and Sportiche (1991).)  

’

’

’

2.2.4 Subject Lowering 
Subject lowering has also been proposed as a source of VSO ordering. One 
such account was proposed for Berber by Choe (1987). She argues that the 
ordering of the verb, subject, and inflectional elements in examples such as 
the following point to subject lowering: 

neg.imp  3fs-eat Tifa fish 
“Tifa is not eating fish”  

 
12.  Ulli          t-ttett  Tifa iselman 
 
 
         (Choe 1987, cited in Carnie 1995, p. 49) 
 
Inflectional elements such as agreement and tense are generally assumed 
to be generated above VP in a separate inflectional projection (IP) or in a 
set  of  separate  inflectional  projections  (such  as  separate  projections  for 
tense and agreement, for instance). Since the inflectional  and agreement 
material  precede  the  verb  in  Berber,  Choe  argues  that  the  verb  itself 
remains in situ inside VP. (It is widely assumed that in languages with 
post-verbal inflectional marking, such as the Romance and Germatic 
languages, verbs raise out of VP and incorporate with inflectional material 
in IP (Pollock 1987, among others).) The postverbal position of Berber
subjects  results  from  lowering  of  subjects  (which  Choe  assumes  to  be 
generated in the specifier of IP) to a VP-adjoined position: 

                                                                         35  

         
                                     
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived?

IP

 Subj.

I’

I

VP

 

13. 

 
 

 
 

V’

 

V 

Object

 
 
 
If this account is correct, it could potentially account for the ordering of 
tense/aspect marking and verbs in SLQZ: aspect markers are generated in 
I, verbs remain in situ, and subjects generated in spec, IP lower to VP and 
adjoin  to  it.  This  would  account  for  both  the  verb-initial  word  order  of 
SLQZ and the fact that aspect markers in SLQZ precede verbs. 

This  analysis,  however,  poses  both theoretical and empirical problems 
for SLQZ. From a theoretical viewpoint, it violates the ban on rightward 
movement forced by antisymmetry requirements (which will be outlined in 
the next section). It is also inconsistent with the contemporary view that 
subjects are generated as specifiers of VP. From an empirical viewpoint, it  
fails to account for the fact that the SLQZ verbs and their aspect markers 
behave as a unit in constructions such as negation: under clausal negation, 
verbs and their aspect markers appear between two negative morphemes, 
as seen in (15): 

,

,

,

,

,

,

perf-eat  Mike      grasshopper 
“Mike ate grasshoppers” 
,

 
14.  B-da u Gye eihlly bx:àady 
 
 
15.  Cë ity b-da u-dya  Gye eihlly bx:àady 
 
Neg   perf-eat-neg Mike grasshoppers 
 
“Mike didn t eat grasshoppers” 
 This suggests that the complex formed by a verb and its aspect marker 
must be a syntactic constituent, not just two separate, adjacent constituents. 
2.2.5 Subject in Situ 
Both  the  verb-raising  and  subject-lowering  accounts  of  VSO  word  order 
outlined above were based on the assumption that subjects are generated as 
specifiers of IP. VSO word order is thus derived by either raising the verb 
past IP or lowering the subject to a postverbal position inside or adjoined 
to VP.   
 
 
 

 
 

36      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

More recently, however, it has been commonly assumed (Koopman and 
Sportiche  1991,  among  others)  that  subjects  are  not  generated  in  inflec-
tional projections, but inside the verb  phrase itself. (Koopman and Spor-
tiche explicitly assert that the subject is generated as a sister of VP, thus 
forming a small clause with VP, but this is not crucial for the following 
analysis.)  Base-generating subjects VP-internally brings subjects into line 
with  objects,  which  have 
to  be  generated  
VP-internally,  and  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  verbs,  not  inflectional 
categories such as tense and agreement, subcategorize arguments and de-
termine thematic structure.  

long  been  assumed 

Under this analysis, VSO results when verbs raise from V to I  (through 
TP and AGRSP, in more contemporary terms), leaving the subject in VP, 
to the right of the inflected verb:6 

 
16. 

IP

’
 I  

I   VP
 DPsubj. V’

 V 

DPobj

 
 
 

 

 
   

   
Koopman and Sportiche propose that VSO languages differ from SVO 
languages    in  the  case  marking  features  of  I:  in  SVO  languages,  I  may 
case-mark its specifier, thus subjects raise to the specifier of IP to receive 
case-marking.  In  VSO  languages,  on  the  other  hand,  I  may  only  assign 
case by head-government (that is, it can only case-mark directly adjacent 
arguments in its complement). 
 
 
 
                                                      
6  Koopman  and  Sportiche  argue  for  an  additional  segment  of  VP  (Vmax),  in 

whose specifier subjects are generated: 

Vm ax 

DPsubj VP

V’

v

 

         
                                     
                                                                         37  
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived?
                                                                        

Koopman  and  Sportiche 

further  differentiate  case-marking  of  
specifiers of I (in SVO languages) and case-marking of complements of I 
(in  VSO  languages) by claiming that in the former case, I is a “case as-
signer by agreement” (that is, it triggers not only nominative case marking  
on subjects in its specifier, but verbal agreement with the subject as well), 
and in the latter case, I is a “case assigner by government” (that is, it as-
signs structural case but does not trigger agreement). They note that while 
SVO languages such as English and the Romance languages always show 
subject person/number agreement on verbs, VSO languages such as Irish 
and Welsh do not.7 As further evidence for the contrast between case as-
signment  by  agreement  and  case  assignment  by  government,  they    note 
that Standard Arabic, which allows both SVO and VSO word order, only 
marks subject person/number agreement on verbs when the subject appears 
preverbally;  otherwise  the  verb  receives  default  (third-person)  agreement 
regardless  of  the  person  and  number  features  of  the  subject.8    In  short, 
when  subjects  raise  to  spec,  IP,  they  trigger  person/number  marking  on 
verbs;  when  subjects  remain  below  I  and  receive  case-marking  by  head-
government, no agreement is triggered. 

They also assert that case assignment by government is restricted by lo-
cality. In cases in which other projections intervene between I and the sub-
ject inside VP, the subject is required to raise to a higher position in order 
to be adjacent to I. For instance, in Welsh, a VSO language, subjects sur-
face immediately after verbs in sentences with clausal negation: 

 
17.  Agorodd    y dynion ddim y drws 
opened-3s the men    not   the door 
 
“The men didn't open the door”   
 
(Koopman and Sportiche 1991, p. 234) 

 
They  assume  that  clausal  negation  originates  in  a  negative  projection 

(NegP) between I and VP: 
 

 

8

                                                      
7 Pamela Munro (p.c.) points out that  a number of VSO langauges, such as Gari-
funa and Mayan, do have subject agreement on verbs, while a number of SVO 
languages, such as Wolof and Chinese, lack subject agreement on verbs. 

 A similar correlation between preverbal subjects and verbal agreement occurs in 
Macuiltianguis  Zapotec,  which  employs  predominantly  SVO  word  order  and 
disallows  subject  agreement  when  postverbal  subjects  appear.   However, 
Macuiltianguis Zapotec also allows certain preverbal subjects to appear without 
agreement markers on the following verb (Foreman 1999). 

 
 

38      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

  18.   

 

 

IP

 I’

I

opened

NegP

Neg’

VP

Neg
not

’

 

 
If the verb “opened” raised past “not” in Neg to I (they presume that ne-
gation  does  not  block  movement  of  the  verb),  leaving  the  subject  in  its 
base-generated  position  within  VP,  the  wrong  word  order  would  result: 
“opened not the men the door” would surface rather than “opened the men 
not the door”. Thus, they argue, the subject “the men” must raise out from 
VP to spec, NegP in order to receive case-marking from I. 

There  is  strong  evidence,  however,  that  strict  adjacency  to  the  raised 
verb is not responsible for VSO word order in SLQZ. For one thing, SLQZ 
allows preverbal (focused) subjects as well as postverbal ones, and front-
ing of the subject does not trigger agreement on the verb: 

’

 
19.  B-da uh Gye eihlly gueht 
 
perf-eat   Mike     tortilla 
 
“Mike ate the tortilla” 
 
20.  Gye eihlly b-da uh gueht 
 
 
 
It could be argued, however, that since preverbal subjects in SLQZ are 
always focused or topicalized, the raising of subjects to preverbal position 
is A-bar movement rather than A movement, and thus does not involve the 
triggering of agreement. 

Mike       perf-eat   tortialla 
“MIKE ate the tortilla” 

A  stronger  piece  of  evidence  against  head-government  of  subjects 
comes  from  the  behavior  of  subjects  and  verbs  when  certain  postverbal 
markers appear. SLQZ has a large inventory of postverbal markers that at-
tach (at least phonologically) to the right edge of verb stems, but precede 
lexical subjects and pronominal subject clitics. 

In the following examples, two such markers appear:   -daàa n  “a lot”, 
and al “already”. Al “already”  may appear either clause-initially, before 
the  verb  (21),  or  postverbally,  between  the  verb  and  the  subject  or  pro-
nominal subject clitic (22): 

’

’

’
 

                                                                         39  
         
                                     
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived?
                                                                        

,

,

,

,

already perf-eat-a.lot-3p.prox. grasshopper 
“They already ate a lot of grasshoppers  

perf-eat-a.lot-already-3p.prox. grasshopper 
“They already ate a lot of grasshoppers 

21.  Al         b-da uhw-daàa n-rëng bx:àady 
 
 
 
22.  B-da uhw-daàa n-al-rëng         bx:àady 
 
 
In these cases either one or two adverbial markers intervene between the 
verb and the subject clitic. In (22), it appears that the verb “eat” and the 
adverbial  “a  lot”  have  raised  around  “already”,  leaving  the  subject  clitic 
stranded. If this is the case, there is no longer strict adjacency between the 
verb  and  the  subject.  Nevertheless,  the  sentence  is  still  licit,  contrary  to 
Koopman and Sportiche's predictions. 

Another  postverbal  marker  is  the  clitic  -ga ,  which  can  be  roughly 
glossed as “instead”. -Ga  may cliticize to either verbs or nouns;  nominals 
marked  by  -ga   obligatorily  appear  preverbally  (as  seen  by  the  ungram-
maticality of (24): 

,

,

,

,
23.  Lia Oliieb-ga       b-gyàa a 

,

,

Ms. Olivia-instead perf-dance 
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)” 
 
perf-dance  Ms. Olivia-instead 
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)” 

,
24.  *B-gyàa ah Lia Oliieb-ga  
 
 
 
25.  B-gyàa ah-ga  Lia Oliieb 
 

,

,

perf-dance-instead Ms. Olivia 
“Olivia DANCED instead (of doing something else/while waiting 
for something else to happen)” 

,

,

,

“Olivia DANCED instead (of doing something else)” 

In cases when -ga   modifies a verb, preverbal subjects are blocked: 
 
,
26.   *Lia Oliieb b-gyàa ah-ga  
          Ms. Olivia perf-dance-instead 
 
 
This suggests that -ga  occupies a fixed position above the normal land-
ing position for verbs, and the constituent it modifies must raise to its left 
(presumably  to  pass  through  the  projection  -ga   occupies  for  feature-
checking purposes). The preverbal subject is blocked in  (24) because rais-
ing of the verb past -ga  either places the verb above the preverbal focus 
projection or otherwise blocks access to it.9 
                                                      
9 The exact position and nature of the projection headed by -ga  is not crucial for 
the current discussion, and I have deliberately set aside these issues here. See 
Chapter 4 for an analysis of the syntax of another clitic that behaves similarly 

,

,

,

 
 

40      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

’

If  verbs modified by  -ga  do indeed raise out of their normal landing 
position (assuming that they normally land in the Tense projection), post-
verbal subjects would be blocked under Koopman and Sportiche s account, 
since  the  verb  does  not  end  up  in  a  position  from  which  it  can  directly 
head-govern the subject, and  -ga  intervenes between the verb and the sub-
ject. Instead, contra the predictions of their account, postverbal subjects are 
required in these constructions and preverbal subjects are banned, as seen 
in (24). In  short, SLQZ does allow postverbal subjects even when other 
syntactic material appears between the verb and the subject. 

It  must  be  mentioned,  however,  that  only  a  limited  inventory  of  con-
stituents  may  appear  between  verbs  and  subjects  in  SLQZ  (parenthetical 
expressions and temporal adverbial phrases, for instance, may not appear 
in this position). Chapters 3 and 4 examine the inventory of functional pro-
jections  in  detail,  and  motivate  some  of  the  co-occurrence  restrictions  
between them. 
2.2.6   Summary 

 

’

This  section  has  outlined  some  of  the  previous  proposals  for  deriving 
VSO word order, and shown that none of these adequately accounts for the 
behavior of SLQZ. Since SLQZ shows clear subject/object asymmetries, it 
cannot be presumed to have a flat, tripartite structure. Since SLQZ allows 
VSO  word  order  even  when  overt  complementizers  are  present,  SLQZ 
verbs  cannot  be  presumed  to  raise  to  C.  Since  SLQZ  preverbal  subject 
constructions don t trigger subject agreement on verbs, and SLQZ allows 
some adverbial elements to intervene between  sentence-initial verbs and 
subjects,  it  can t  be  the  case  that    subjects  remain  in  situ  in  VP  and  are 
head-governed by verbs in I. Finally, since SLQZ verbs and their aspec-
tual/tense-marking prefixes behave as syntactic units, SLQZ verbs cannot 
be construed as remaining in situ while subjects generated elsewhere lower 
into VP. Chapter 3 presents an alternate proposal  that more adequately ac-
counts for the morphological and word-order constraints of SLQZ. 
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994): An 

’

Overview 

Now  I  turn  to  the  theoretical  framework  that  will  motivate  the  rest  
of this work. The field of generative grammar is based on the notion that  
grammar is truly “universal” in that all language learners begin to acquire 
their  languages  with  the  same  innately  determined  constraints  on  
possible  forms  a  language  can  take  (Chomsky  1957).    It  has  been  
 
 

                                                                                                                          
(the modal marker-zhya  ) and its use as a diagnostic for the ordering of prever-
bal functional projections. 

’
’
’
 

                                                                         41  

2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994) 

widely assumed that the range of possible differences among the world’s 
languages can be derived from choices in how a number of parameters set 
by someone acquiring a given language. Since SVO and VSO languages 
have prepositions and VOS and SOV languages have postpositions, for ex-
ample, it often assumed that learners of these two respective groups of lan-
guages  must  learn  at  an  early  age  that  their  languages  are  either  “left 
branching”  or  “right  branching”  —  that  is,  complements  of  locational 
markers  or  other  pre-/postpositions  may  appear  either  before  these  ele-
ments (in left-branching, postpositional languages) or after them (in right-
branching,  prepositional  languages).  For  instance,  the  structures  for  the 
phrase “by car” in English, a prepositional language, and Japanese, a post-
positional language, have traditionally been assumed to be base-generated 
as follows: 

 
27.   English: 
       

 PP

P

’

NP

 car 

 P
 by

28. 

Japanese: 

 PP

 P’

 NP

    

kuruma
(car)

 P
de
(by)

     
Directionality, then, has been one of the parameters generally assumed 

to be allowable within the range of possible human languages. 

In  his  1992  paper  and  1994  monograph,  Kayne  proposes  that  all  lan-
guages are underlyingly derived from identical structures. This assumption 
forces an even stricter set of constraints on what is “universal” about uni-
versal grammar. He suggests that all languages, regardless of surface word 
order, branch to the right and are “antisymmetric”: that is, word order is 
directly correlated to structural hierarchy. Thus, elements that are higher in 
a  tree  structure  necessarily  precede  elements  that  are  lower; high constitu-
ents appear on the left of the tree stucture and lower ones on the right. This 
proposal  is  represented  formally  as  The  Linear  Correspondence  Axiom 
(LCA), shown below: 

 
 

42      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

29.  D(A) is a linear ordering of T    (Kayne 1994, p. 6) 
 
Here,  T  is  a  set  of  terminal  elements,    D  is  the  dominance  relation 
among non-terminal elements, A is a set of asymmetrically c-commanding 
pairs of non-terminals, and D(A) is the set of terminals dominated by A. In 
other words, all tree structures are binary branching, and all pairs of non-
terminals  are  antisymmetric  (one  c-commands  the  other,  but  not  vice 
versa). Thus, the linear ordering of terminal elements is a direct reflection 
of the structural hierarchy of the elements that dominate them: a constitu-
ent that precedes another in a sentence is necessarily higher than it in the 
tree structure.  

The  LCA,  then,  renders  illicit  a  number  of  structures  previously  as-
sumed to be allowable. For instance, VSO languages were argued to be 
derived  from  ternary-branching  structures  such  as  the  following,  repeated 
from Section 2.2.1: 

 
30. 

S

V NP NP

 
This structure violates that LCA by (1) not being binary branching and 
(2) allowing all its terminals (V and the two NPs) to mutually c-command 
each other. In short, this structure shows no correlation between linear or-
der and structural hierarchy; all its terminals are equally high in the tree 
structure. 

There is empirical, as well as theoretical evidence ruling out structures 
such as (30) and suggesting the correctness of the LCA. If VSO languages 
were indeed derived from flat structures such as (30), there should be no 
subject-object asymmetries in VSO languages, since subjects and objects 
would mutually c-command each other. As seen in section 2.2.1, however, 
this proves not to be the case: a number of unrelated VSO languages, in-
cluding  SLQZ,  show  patterns  indicating  that  subjects  are  indeed  higher 
than objects (for instance, examples 5 and 6 in this chapter).  

Apparent counterexamples to the LCA,  such as the existence of postpo-
sitions, can be accounted for by positing movement of a constituent  from  
a lower position (such as the complement position of an underlying prepo-
sition)  to  a  higher  position  (such  as  a  position  above  this  “preposition”, 
which,  because  of  this  reordering  of  its  complement,  now  surfaces  as  a 
postposition).  For instance, Japanese postpositional structures such as that 
in (28) can now be seen as derived from structures like those of English 
prepositional structures as follows: 

 

 

                                                                         43  

                                                              
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994)

 31.   

         

 PP

 P’

 NP

kuruma

(car)

 P
de
(by)

Kayne  argues  that  suggestive  evidence  for  movement  of  comple- 
ments  of  “postpositions”  in  languages  such  as  Japanese  comes  from  
the  fact  that  postpositions  agree  with  their  complements  in  a  number  of 
left-branching languages, but no such agreement occurs in languages with 
prepositions.  If  agreement  is  assumed  to  be  a  reflex  of  specifier- 
head  agreeement  (per  Chomsky  1992,  among  others),  the  presence  of 
agreeement  in  postpositional  structures  supports  Kayne's  view  that  com-
plements  of  locational  markers  have  raised  to  the  specifier  of  PP  in  
these structures. 

,
 In  short,    Kayne  argues,  differences  in  word  order  across  the  world s 
languages  are  not  the  result  of  different  underlying  structures  or  direc-
tionality,  but  of  different  movement  strategies  constrained  by  the  re- 
requirement that  languages be fully antisymmetric. Thus, if Kayne is correct, 
directionality  per  se  can  no 
longer  be  considered  a  parameter  
selected by different languages. 

Kayne  argues  that  this  proposal    has  a  number  of  desirable  empirical 
consequences.  X-bar  theory,  usually  considered  a  primitive  of  linguistic 
theory, for example, can be derived by the requirement that word order and 
structural hierarchy be strictly correlated. Other general constraints, previ-
ously  considered  either  stipulations  or  simply  descriptions  of  gen- 
eral  crosslinguistic  phenomena,  can  also  be  accounted  for  under    his  
proposal.  Since  some  of  the  mechanics  of  his  proposal  are  assumed  (or 
modified) later in this work, I provide a brief description of them here. 

The  basic  structural  relationship  that  defines  the  hierarchical  and  lin- 
ear  ordering  of  elements  under  the  principles  of  antisymmetry  is 
c-command. This relationship has long been considered essential in the defi-
nition  of  hierarchical  relations  such  as  those  involved  in  binding  
theory  (Reinhart  1981).  Exact  definitions  of  c-command  vary  (Reinhart 
1981,  Aoun  and  Sportiche  1983)  but  the  most  basic  definition  of  the  
notion is as follows: 

 
32.  A c-commands B iff neither A nor B dominate each other and the 

first branching   node above A dominates B. 

 
This definition makes no assumptions about the categorical status of A, 
B  and  the  node  above  A  that  dominates  B.  A  consequence  of  this  
definition is that c-command relations may be bidirectional and structures 

 
 

44      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

may be symmetric. For instance, in a structure such as (33) both A and B 
c-command each other: 

 
33. 

 

C

   

 D 

 B

 A 

 
The possibility of bidirectional c-command is problematic for the theory 
of antisymmetry.    If  linear ordering and hierarchical order are strictly cor-
related, and if hierarchical order is defined by c-command relations, then a 
structure such as the one above, coupled with the preceding definition of 
c-command,  would  wrongly  predict  both  that  B  precedes  A  (since  B  c-
commands A) and A  precedes B (since A c-commands B). Clearly, these 
two conditions cannot be true simultaneously. 

Kayne  handles  this  problem  by  positing  a  stricter  definition  of  c-

command: 

 
34.  X c-commands Y iff X and Y are categories  [Kayne s italics] and 
X excludes Y and every category  that dominates X dominates Y.   
(Kayne 1994, p. 18) 

’ 

 
Unless otherwise noted, this is the definition of c-command that I will 
assume in the rest of this work.  In this definition, categories are assumed 
to be full projections (that is, topmost XP nodes). Thus, segments of cate-
gories (that is, X-bars or other non-terminal nodes under an XP) may not 
c-command other elements.10 Kayne crucially  assumes that dominance of 
one  projection  (XP)  over  another  (YP)  requires  that  all  non-terminal  
segments of a dominating projection XP dominate YP.  The crucial distinc-
tion Kayne makes in this definition then, is that only categories (full XP 
projections) are visible to c-command relations.  

                                                      
10 Kayne, however, assumes that intermediate nodes between terminals and the top 

nodes of categories are XPs, rather than X-bars, as follows: 

 

 
 

  

 

XP

XP

                     
 
 Because nothing in my analysis depends on this distinction, and because X  is a 

more familiar notation for position, I will continue to use X  in this work. 

’ 

X

’ 

                                                                        45  
                                                                        
                                                              
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994)

ZP

XP WP

 

 
35. 

 

   

YP

,

 
For instance, in (35), XP, WP, ZP, and YP are categories. ZP dominates 
XP, WP, and YP. XP c-commands YP since ZP and all other categories 
higher than XP also dominate YP. For the same reasons, WP c-commands 
XP.  YP,  however,  does  not  c-command  XP  because  the  first  category 
dominating YP (WP) does not dominate XP. 

In his definition of c-command, Kayne adopts Chomksy s (1986) defini-
tion  of  exclusion:  X  excludes  Y  iff  no  segment  of  X  dominates  Y.  The 
condition that the c-commander and c-commandee exclude each other de-
rives  the  “branching  node”  condition  in  older  c-command  definitions:  
since WP does not exclude YP in (35), for instance, WP cannot be con-
strued as c-commanding YP, even though WP and YP are both categories  
and every category dominating WP dominates YP. 

The requirement that tree structures be completely antisymmetric, with 
dominance and linear ordering determined by c-command relations as de-
fined in (34), results in a highly constrained set of possible structures that 
is still capable of allowing a wide variety of possible word orderings. Be-
’ 
cause  only  full  XPs  may  c-command  and  be  c-commanded,  per  Kayne s 
definition,  segments  are  invisible  to  calculation  of  c-command  relations, 
phrasal projections are limited to specifiers (phrasal projections adjoined to 
the left of  other phrasal projections:  YP in Figure (36) is the specifier of 
XP),    heads  (terminals of phrasal projections, such as X in Figure (36)), 
and complements (phrasal projections generated as sisters to heads, which 
appear to the right of heads: ZP in Figure (36), for instance, is the com-
plement of XP): 

 

 
XP

YP

X’

 
36. 
 
 

 

 

 
 
Thus,  multiple  specifier  stuctures,  such  as  multiple  adjunctions  to  the 

ZP

X

same projection, are  ruled out. 

 
 

46      2  Background and Theoretical Assumptions 

37

XP

YP

XP

WP

ZP

X’

X 

 

’ 

QP

       

          

 
 
 
Structures such as (37) are illicit because the two XPs are not separate 
categories  (that  is,  they  are  not  independent  phrasal  projections),  but  are 
rather segments of the same category  XP (just as X  is also a segment of 
XP, the lower  XP is a segment of the higher XP). Recall from the discus-
sion  of  (34)  that  segments  are  defined  as  “X-bars  or  other  non-terminal 
nodes  under  an  XP”.  Since  the  lower  XP  node  is  not  the  topmost  non-
terminal node of XP, it is considered a segment, rather than a distinct cate-
gory.  YP in (37) asymmetrically c-commands QP, so by the LCA (which 
links structural hierarchy to linear precedence) YP must precede QP. How-
ever,  ZP  above  also  c-commands  WP,  thus  wrongly  predicting  that  ZP 
(and QP, which it dominates) precedes WP. Thus, YP and ZP fail to be de-
fined in their linear or hierarchical relation to one another. 

 A notable consequence of this is that adjuncts are now assumed to be 
the sole specifiers of the projections they appear in. (Thus, YP in (36) can 
be considered an adjunct of XP.)  Another consequence is that specifiers 
may c-command out of their projections since they are not dominated by 
them. For instance, in Figure (38) below, ZP  c-commands Y: ZP excludes 
YP  (it  does  not  dominate  any  segment  of  YP)  and  every  category  that 
dominates  ZP  dominates  YP.  (YP  does  not  dominate  ZP  in  Kayne s 
’
framework  because  only  the  top  node  of  YP  contains  ZP;  Y ,  the  other 
nonterminal node of YP does not dominate ZP). 

’

 
38. 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
XP

YP

ZP Y’

X’

X 

Z’

Y

 

 
 
 
Thus,  Kayne s  definition  of  c-command  correctly  posits  ZP  to  
c-command  and  precede  Y,  and  YP  to  c-command  and  precede  X.  Evi-
dence that specifiers c-command out of their projections comes from data 
such as the following: 

Z 
’ 

 

 

2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994)

47  

24) 

39.  Nobody s articles ever get published fast enough (Kayne 1994, p. 

’ 

 
Negative  polarity  items  such  as  ever  are  standardly  assumed  to  be  li-
censed by c-commanding negative constituents. Here, ever is licensed by 
nobody, which Kayne assumes to be the specifier of the projection headed 
by articles. 

The possibility of structures such as (38) allows apparent cases of mul-
tiple adjunction by allowing adjuncts to appear as specifiers of other speci-
fiers: in (38), YP, the specifier of XP, could be an adjunct of XP, and ZP, 
the specifier of YP, could be an adjunct of YP. For instance, Kayne posits 
structures  such  as  (38)  for  cases  of  from  multiple  clitic  adjunction  in 
French:  

Jean to.you it will.give 
“Jean will give it to you” (from Kayne 1994, p. 20) 

 
40.  Jean vous le donnera 
 
 
 
In this sentence, two clitics, vous  “to you”, and le “it”, appear to be ad-
joined  to  the  same  head,  donnera  “will  give”.    Kayne  suggests  that  the 
verb donnera  “will give” be posited as the head of XP, le “it” will be the 
head  of  YP,  and  vous    “to  you”  will  be  the  head  of  ZP  in  (38).  This  is 
shown below in  (41): 

 
 

 

YP

ZP

Z’

Z
vous
(to you)

X’
donnera
(will give)

XP

Y’

Y’
le
(it)

 
41. 
 

 
 

 

tions.  

 
Thus, all adjunction must now be seen as movement to  specifier posi-

The  precise  mechanics  of  Kayne’s  theory  are  still  a  matter  of  debate 
(see,  for  example  Koopman  (1996)  for  a  potential  modification  of  these 
structural constraints). Some of Kayne’s  basic assumptions and strategies 
for maintaining antisymmetry, and their applications to SLQZ, are exam-
ined in further detail in the following chapters. 

 
 

3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  
Arguments for VP Raising 

 

3.1 Overview 

 

This chapter examines in further detail the verbal morphology of SLQZ, 
and  begins  to  investigate  how  SLQZ  verbal  morphology  is  reflected  in 
syntactic  structure.  I  argue  for  a  radical  approach  to  verb  movement    in 
SLQZ: I demonstrate that the VP, not the V, raises, and that tense, aspect 
and agreement features are checked by VP raising through the specifiers of 
the  relevant  functional  projections,  rather  than  V-raising  through  their 
heads. Similar strategies have also been independently proposed for other, 
unrelated verb-initial languages (Chung 1998; Massam (2000); Rackowski 
and Travis (2000), Davis and Demirdache (1998)). 

 In brief, the structure I propose is as follows: arguments are generated 
VP-internally,   and   raise  out  of  VP  into  their  respective  agreement 
projections:

 
1. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

TP

T’

T

AgrSP

DPsubj

AgrS’

AgrS

AgrOP 

DPobj

AgrO’

AgrO

VP

tsubj …V… tobj

50      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

Then  the  VP  itself,  containing  the  traces  of  its  arguments,  raises  to  

spec, TP: 

2. 

           

TP

T’

 VP

tsubj …V… tobj

T

AgrSP

DPsubj

AgrS’

AgrS

AgrOP 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(The internal structure of VP is described in detail below.) 
This movement accounts not only for the verbal morphology of SLQZ, 

DPobj

AgrO’

AgrO

tvp

but also for its VSO word order.  

 I first  show that SLQZ inflected verb complexes cannot be derived un-
der  a  standard  head-raising  analysis,  then  elaborate  upon  the  VP-raising 
analysis shown above. I  then show how this analysis accounts for both the 
distribution and structure of verb forms in SLQZ. I  also examine evidence 
that VSO word order and morphological constraints in a number of other 
languages may likewise be derived from VP-raising.  

This analysis has a number of consequences for the grammar of SLQZ 
overall; this chapter describes how some of SLQZ’s other notable features 
fall out directly as a result of this analysis. 
3.2  SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited: Problems for 

Verbal Head Movement 

In  Chapter  1,  the  verbal  morphology  of  SLQZ  is  described  in  detail:  
verb  stems  are  obligatorily  preceded  by  aspect  markers,  and  followed  
by  subject  agreement  clitics  if  their  subjects  are  pronominal.  Other  
morphological  material  may  affix  to  either  the  left  edge  of  the  verb  
stem (after the aspect marker) or to the right edge of the verb stem (before 
the 
singular  pronominal  
objects  may  be  expressed  as  clitics  at  the  rightmost  edge  of  the  verb  
complex.  
 
  

subject  agreement  clitic).  Third-person 

3.2  SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited

51 

    Thus, a template for a fully inflected verb in SLQZ (repeated from Chapter 
1) would be as follows:   
ASP(directional)(causative)VERB(sec.rt)(sec.rt)(adv.)(adv.)(adv.)(SAM) 
(Obj.clitic) 

Deriving  a  syntactic  structure  for this configuration, however, raises a 
number of problems. Adopting the standard assumptions that verbs are in-
flected through head-movement and  morphemes are affixed in the order in 
which they occur in the syntax (following Baker’s (1985) Mirror Princi-
ple), and (per Kayne (1994)) raised heads can only adjoin  to the left of 
higher heads they raise to,  morphemes on the left edge of a verbal com-
plex formed by incorporation must be base-generated above those on the 
right. 

 This  works  in  the  following  way:    an  incorporated    complex  of  mor-

phemes zyx  is derived from the base-generated structure  xyz: 

3.
    
    
    

 

 

 

  XP

X’ 

Y P

X
x 

Y’

Y 
 y

Z’ 

ZP

 Z 
 z

Under the assumptions of the Mirror Principle, the lexical head z adjoins 

to the left of the head y  (right adjunction is banned by antisymmetry): 

 
4. 

   

           

  XP

X’ 

X
x 

 

Y P

Y’

Y 

ZP

Z 
z

Y 
y

Z’ 

tz 

 
 
 

 

 

52      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

The complex head zy  then adjoins to the left of x: 
5. 

 
XP

X’ 

X
x

X

Y
y

Y 

Z
z

Y P

Y’

ty

ZP

Z’ 

tz 

Thus, morphemes in incorporated structures surface in the reverse order 

of their base-generated syntactic order. 

The head-movement incorporation strategies just outlined were posited 
in part to account for the order of verbal morphemes in polysynthetic lan-
guages, which show obvious noun incorporation. Baker (1996) notes that 
polysynthetic languages across a  range of language families show a strong 
parallelism in the ordering of their verbal morphemes: incorporated objects 
appear to the left of the verb stem, while tense/aspect markers appear to the 
right of the verb stem. An example of typical verbal morpheme ordering is 
seen in the following Mohawk sentence: 

(Mohawk: Baker 1996, p. 30) 

MsS-meat-Ø-eat-hab-past 
 
“He used to eat meat” 

 
6.  Ra’-wárh-a-k-s-kwe’ 
 
 
In short, verbal morphemes in polysynthetic languages are ordered from 
left to right in exactly the reverse order as the generally accepted order of 
their base-generated positions: it is generally assumed that tense and aspect 
are licensed preverbally high in the tree structure (near the left edge) while 
objects  are  generated  below  (and  after)  the  verb.    The  head-movement 
strategy previously outlined, then, allows this ordering of morphemes to be 
derived from a syntactic structure parallel to that attested in other language 
types. 

This  strategy,  however,  proves  problematic  for    SLQZ  (and,  as  I  also 
show,  a  number  of  other  VSO  languages).  Under  the  assumption  that 
SLQZ verbal inflection is derived by head-movement,  a structure consis-
tent  with  the  verbal  template  above  (repeated  below)  would  thus  look 
something  like  this  (projections  that  do  not  appear  obligatorily  are  in  
parentheses): 

3.2  SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited

53 

7.  

ASP(directional)(causative)VERB(sec.rt)(sec.rt)(adv.)(adv.)(adv.)(SAM)

(Obj.clitic) 

AgrOP

AgrSP 

(Adv)

 

(Adv)

 (A dvP )

(Sec.RootP)

VP

(CausP)

(Di rect.P)

 AspP

Such a structure is clearly undesirable. First, placement of AgrO above 
AgrS  is  virtually  unattested  in  linguistic  theory,  as  is  the  idea  that  as-
pect/tense inflection is generated below the root verb, and it is unwise to 
assume that SLQZ can differ from other languages in such  crucial ways. 
Also,  it  has  been  convincingly  argued  that  in  verbs  with  causative  alter-
nates (such as run in Mike runs versus causative run in  Mike ran the horse 
around the track), the projection serving the causative function is directly 
above,  not  below  the  root  verb  (cf.  Hale  and  Keyser  1993,  Kural  1996, 
Chomsky 1995, among others). 

Another  option  is  that  heads  may  adjoin  to  either  the  left  or  right  
edge  of  the  verbal  head  as  it  raises  up  through  the  structure.  Thus,  the  
Aspect  and  Causative  heads  would  adjoin  to  the  left  edge  of  the  verb,  
and the others adjoin to the right edge. Such an approach is problematic  
for  several  reasons.  First,  it    clearly  violates  the  spirit  (if  not  the  
etter )   of  the  Mirror  Principle:   since  the  ordering  of  morphemes  on  the  
verb  would  only  partially  reflect  their  ordering  in  the  tree  structure,  
there  would  be  no  way  of  telling  whether  the  left-adjoining  morphemes  
are  generated  higher  or  lower  than  the  right-adjoining  ones.  Second,  it 
clearly  violates  Kayne’s  (1994)  Linear  Correspondence  Axiom  (LCA)  
by  forming  structures  that  branch  in  more  than  one  direction.  Although  
it  has  been  suggested  (Potter  1995)  that  languages  may  select  the  direc-
tionality  in  which  adjoined  heads  surface  at  PF  (some  languages  spell  
out  adjoined  heads  at  the  left  edges  of  phonological  structures  at  PF,  

 

54      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

others to the right), it is not possible under Potter’s theory for a language 
to spell out material in both directions simultaneously. 

A  final,  and  potentially  simplest,  option  would  be  to  adopt  a  non-
ordered feature-checking approach, consistent with Chomsky 1995: contra 
Baker, Kayne, etc., features checked by movement may be checked in any 
order, and feature-checking is not constrained by the physical ordering of 
morphemes. This would be the best option to adopt if it were the case that 
inflected  verbs  in  SLQZ  behaved  consistently  like  heads  in  all  contexts. 
There  is,  however,  clear  evidence  that  this  is  not  the  case.  Some  of  this 
evidence is presented in the following section. 

3.2.1 Evidence Against Head-Movement of SLQZ Verbs 
There are a number of syntactic contexts in SLQZ in which verbs and XPs 
may appear interchangeably. Below I discuss three of these: modification 
by second-position adverbial clitics, constituent negation, and verbal com-
pound formation. 

 

 Adverbial Clitic Placement
One  piece  of  evidence  against  the  head  status  of  inflected  SLQZ  verbs 
comes from the distribution of second-position adverbial clitics: they may 
modify DPs as well as inflected verbs.   The clitic -zhya’, used to express 
epistemic modality, for instance,  may affix to either verbs (as seen in (8) 
below) or to DPs, as seen in (9). 

 
8.  N-u’-zhya’-rëng             Lohs Aa’nngl 
neut-exist-might-3p.prox Los Angeles 
 
“They might be in Los Angeles (temporarily)” 
 
 
[e.g., it might the case that they are in Los Angeles] 
 
9. 
 
 
 
 
In the following examples, the adverbial clitic -ga’, “instead/for the time 

Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’-rëng 
Los Angeles-might   neut-exist-3p.prox 
“They might be in LOS  ANGELES “ 
[e.g., Los Angeles is where they might be/live] 

being” also attaches to both DPs and verbs: 

 

3.2  SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited

55 

Ms. Olivia-instead perf-dance 
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)” 

10.  Lia Oliieb-ga’      b-gyàa’ah 
 
 
 
11.  B-gyàa’ah-ga’      Lia Oliieb 
perf-dance-instead Ms. Olivia 
 
 
“Olivia DANCED instead (of doing something else/ 
while waiting for something else to happen)” 

The  preceding  four  examples  show  that  the  scope  of  the  adverb  (and 
thus the interpretation of the sentence) varies according the constituent it is 
affixed to. In (8), where the modal clitic -zhya’ appears attached to the sen-
tence-initial  verb  “exist”,  the  modality  takes  scope  over  the  entire  event 
denoted by the VP (the event of being in Los Angeles is a possible state of 
affairs). When -zhya’  “might” is attached to sentence-initial “Los Ange-
les” (in (9)), the modality takes scope only over “Los Angeles” (e.g., “Los 
Angeles might be the place where they are”).  

The differing placement of -ga’ “instead/for the time being” in (10) and 
(11) results in similar contrasts. In (11), for example, -ga’  “instead” takes 
scope over the nominal  “Ms. Olivia”, indicating that Olivia was the par-
ticipant selected to dance instead of someone else. In (10), -ga’ takes scope 
over the verb “dance”, with the meaning that Olivia chose dancing instead 
of another activity.  In other words, -ga’ serves to distinguish the constitu-
ent it modifies as an object  or activity selected out of a set of possible al-
ternatives.  

These  examples  suggest  that  adverbial  clitics  occupy a fixed syntactic 
position, and that constituents that they modify raise to their left. A syntac-
tic, rather than morphological, account of cliticization is supported by the 
fact that the appearance of any of these clitics in a sentence will constrain 
possible  word  orders. 
  Arguments  modified  by  certain  adverbial  
clitics (such as -ga’ “instead/for the time being”), for instance, must appear 
preverbally, rather than in their canonical postverbal argument positions: 

“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)” 

12.   Lia Olieb-ga’        b-gyàa’ah  
      Ms.Olivia-instead perf-dance 
     
 
13.  *B-gyàa’ah Lia Olieb-ga’ 
 
 
 This  suggests  that  constituents  modified  by  such  adverbial  clitics  are 
required  to  raise  to  some  higher  position  (above  the  position  in  which 
verbs  without  adverbial  clitics  ordinarily  surface)  in  order  to  license  the  
relation between themselves and the adverbial. Thus, at least some adver-
bial  clitics  must  be  generated  (or  have  their  features  licensed)  above  

perf-dance  Ms. Olivia-instead 
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)” 

 

56      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

the position where inflected verbs generally surface at PF, which I assume 
to be TP.1 

This possibility is supported by other word-order constraints imposed on 
sentences  whose  verbs  appear  with  certain  adverbial  clitics.  Verbs  cliti-
cized by -zhya’, for instance, disallow preverbal subjects: 

 
14.  B-da’uhw-al-ru-zhya’          Gye’eihlly bx:àady 
perf-eat-already-more-might Mike grasshopper 
 
 
“Mike might have already eaten more grasshoppers” 
 
15.  *Gye’eihlly b-da’uhw-al-ru-zhya’          bx:àady 
     Mike           perf-eat-already-more-might grasshopper 
 
“Mike might have already eaten more grasshoppers” 
SLQZ  subjects  may  appear  fairly  freely  in  preverbal  position  when 
given  contrastive  focus  readings.  I  thus  assume  the  existence  of  a  high 
(pre-TP) functional projection for syntactic focus movement (FocP); fur-
ther  evidence  for  this  will  be  outlined  in  Chapter  4.  The  fact  that  argu-
ments may not appear preverbally in constructions such as (15) suggests 
that the verb has raised to the left of the adverbial clitic and landed in a po-
sition at least as high as the preverbal focus projection. 

Thus, there is strong evidence that at least some adverbial clitics force 
the raising of constituents they modify. As seen above, either  DPs or in-
flected  verbs  may  be  targeted  for  movement.  The  parallel  constraints  on 
both  types  of  constituent  suggest  that  the  syntactic  processes  they  must 
undergo must also be parallel: thus, either inflected verbs must be treated 
as XPs, or other phrasal constituents treated as heads. 

I will assume for the moment that the class of adverbial clitics that force 
movement of the constituents they modify are generated as heads of spe-
cific functional projections. A constituent modified by an adverbial suffix 
such as -ga “instead” (such as “Ms. Olivia” in (12), for instance) raises to 
the specifier of the projection occupied by -ga’, thus licensing its relation 
with the adverbial by specifier-head agreement: 

AdvP

16. 
          
 DP

 
Lia Oliieb
(Ms. Olivia)  

Adv’

 TP 
 ..... 

Adv  
-ga’   
(instead)

This movement results in the modified DP or verb surfacing to the left 
of  the  adverbial  suffix.  The  fact  that  both  DPs  and  verbs  appear  in  the 
                                                      
1The  idea  that  adverbs    are  generated  in  their  own  functional  projections  is 

explored in detail by Cinque (1998).

3.2  SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited

57 

same structure with the same syntactic effects (both trigger the same con-
straint against preverbal focus) suggests that they undergo the same kind of 
movement.  This  suggests,  then,  that  SLQZ  verbs  may  undergo  the  same 
movement as XPs such as DPs, and supports the view that SLQZ verbs are 
indeed VPs.  

Identical Negation Patterns for Verbs and XPs 
Further    evidence  against  the  head  status  of  inflected  verbs  comes  from 
their  distribution  and  behavior  under  negation.  SLQZ  negation  is  most 
commonly expressed by two discontinuous morphemes; negated constitu-
ents  appear  between  these  two  elements.  Standard  clausal  negation  in 
SLQZ, for instance,  consists of a clause-initial negative morpheme cë’ity 
followed by the negated verb and the morpheme -dya’ (which I leave un-
glossed for the moment) then the subject or pronominal subject agreement 
marker: 

neg     subj-beat-dya’  Mike Felipe 
“Mike didn’t hit Felipe”  

 
17.  Cë’ity ny-àa’izy-dya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
 
 
 
Under  standard  assumptions  about  clausal  negation  (Pollock  1989, 
Zanuttini 1991, among others), negated verbs raise into the head of NegP.  
In cases of standard clausal negation in SLQZ, this does not seem prob-
lematic. 

A head-movement account of clausal negation, however, fails to account 
for  other  common  negation  structures  in  SLQZ.  Contrastively  focused 
verbs, for instance, may be negated with the negative element a’ti’  instead 
of cë’ity: 

 
18.  A’ti’ gw-àa’izy-dya’Gye’eihlly Li’eb, b-cuhni’-ëng       Li’eb 
 
neg perf-hit-dya’     Mike         Felipe  perf-kick-3s.prox Felipe 
 
“Mike didn’t HIT Felipe, he KICKED Felipe. 
It could be claimed that the only difference between (17), the negated 
sentence with cë’ity, and (18), the sentence with negated contrastive focus 
(with a’ti’) is that  a’ti’ appears  instead of cë’ity.  The verb, along with the 
negative element -dya’, raises by head-movement to the head of NegP in 
both constructions. 

This, however, poses problems for other constructions with the negative 
morpheme  a’ti’.  A’ti’    is  most  commonly  used  to  negate  adjectival  and 
nominal  predicates,  as  well  as  contrastively  focused  constituents  and 
prepositional  phrases.  In  these  constructions,  a’ti’    precedes,  and    -dya’ 
follows, the negated constituent: 

 

58      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

19.  A’ti’ Sann Luu’c-dya’ gw-èeh Pa’amm 
 

neg San Lucas-dya’     perf-go Pam 
“Pam  didn’t  go  to  SAN  LUCAS  (but  rather  somewhere  else)”  
(DP) 

20.  A’ti’  cuann tenedoor-dya’ b-da’uw Gye’eihlly gueht 
neg with   fork          dya’    perf-eat  Mike         tortilla 
 
 
“Mike didn’t eat tortillas with a fork” 
(PP) 

 

 

21.  A’ti’ bùu’nny zyùall-dya’ n-àa  Gye’eihlly 
 
 

neg man      tall -dya’         neut-be Mike 
“Mike isn’t a tall man”   
 
(DP/NP) 

 

 

 

 

Since proper names (such as Sann Luu’c “San Lucas”) are presumably 
DPs, rather than Ns or Ds, the idea that any material that appears between 
a’ti’ and dya’ is a head is problematic. The appearance of clearly phrasal 
elements such as cuann tenedoor “with a fork” between a’ti’ and dya’  is 
further  evidence  against  the  idea  that  a’ti’  constructions  are  derived  by 
head-movement of negated constituents into NegP.  Equally problematic is 
the possibility of allowing either heads or XPs to participate in this con-
struction. The fact that inflected verbs pattern with clearly non-head-like 
constituents under focus negation indicates that they should be treated as 
XPs,  rather  than  heads.  (Detailed syntactic  structures  for  SLQZ  negative 
constructions will be proposed in Chapter 4.) 

One  could  logically  assume,  then,  that    the  same  type  of  movement 
takes  place  in  all  cases  of  a’ti’    negation:  either  head  movement  or  XP 
movement to a specifier position. Thus, as with the adverbial suffixation 
cases outlined previously, either inflected verbs behave like XPs and raise 
to specifier positions, or XPs such as the PPs and  DPs above are treated 
like heads in the syntax and undergo head-movement. I will adopt the first 
option,  and  show  that  it  accounts  for  not  only  the  word  order  and  mor-
pheme ordering facts of SLQZ, but of other VSO languages as well. The 
latter option was explored by Carnie (1995). I will return to his proposal, 
as well as an alternate account for the data he presents, in the appendix to 
this chapter. 

There are also morphological arguments against treating SLQZ verbs as 
heads. The most obvious argument against it is that it fails to account for 
the ordering of SLQZ verbal morphemes; as I will show in Section  2.2.2, 
the XP-raising analysis does account for this.  
Absence of Head-Movement Effects 
Another  piece  of  morphological  evidence  against  the  head  status  of  
phrasal  units  in  SLQZ  is  the  absence  of  head-movement/incorporation  
effects  in  the  formation  of  SLQZ  words.  The  word  ryu’lààa’z    “likes”,  

3.2  SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited

59 

for  instance,  consists  of  two  morphemes:  ryu’uh  “enters”  and  lààa’z 
“heart”. If it were the case that verbs were heads, ryu’lààa’z would have to 
be  posited  to  be  the  result  of  incorporation,  with  the  head  ryu’  “enters” 
raising and left-adjoining to the head lààa’z  “heart”: 

22. 

 

 * NP

 N’

 N 

 VP

N

 V’

lààa’z
 heart

V
ryu’
enter
 
 
Such  incorporation,  however,  would  wrongly    form  a  nominal,  rather 

t

than a verbal, element since lààa’z, the head of the compound, is a noun.  

Another option would be to assume that incorporated heads may adjoin 
to  the  right,  rather  than  the  left,  of  the  higher  head.  In  this  case,  lààa’z 
“heart” would incorporate into  ryu’  “enter” , thus forming a compound 
properly headed by a verb:  

 
23.  

 * VP

 V’

 V 

 NP

V
ryu’
enter

N

lààa’z
 heart

 N’

t

 
Structures  such  as  (23)  violate  the  LCA  by  allowing  multidirectional 
branching. I thus assume that  such structures are illicit. Furthermore, even 
if right adjunction were a legitimate option, it would be highly inconsistent 
with the strongly left-branching, head-initial architecture of SLQZ. 

Munro, Lopez et al (1999) list  a number of SLQZ verbal expressions 
that clearly exemplify  this problem.  One such expression is ruhnybyùùzh 
“tears into little pieces”. This verb is composed of two morphemes: ruhny  
“make/do” and byùuzh “meat pieces on chicharrones”.  Thus, it is clearly 
derived from an expression with byùuzh as the syntactic object of “make”.  

 

60      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

Compounds such as ryu’lààa’z  and ruhnybyùùzh  are treated as single  
grammatical  units with fixed, non-compositional meanings in SLQZ. Sub-
jects and subject agreement markers follow both morphemes (and may not 
appear  between the morphemes), and their composite morphemes cannot 
be broken apart by syntactic processes such as adverbial cliticization. Sec-
ond-position clitics such as -zhya’ “might”, for instance, may not break up 
compounds containing lààa’z:  

perf-forget-might     Mike         subj-feed   Mike        dog  
“Mike might have forgotten to feed the dog” 

24.  B-yannlààa’z-zhya’ Gye’eihlly n-gyaàa’nn Gye’eihlly bèe’cw 
 
 
 
25.  *B-yann-zhya’-lààa’z Gye’eihlly n-gyaàa’n  
 
 
 

perf-forget-might     Mike            subj-feed 
“Mike might have forgotten 

Gye’eihlly bèe’cw 
Mike        dog 
to feed the dog”2 

 
 
   
Adverbial  suffixes,  if  present,  must  appear  after  the  secondary  root 
lààa’z  ,  as  seen  in  the  grammaticality  contrast  between  (24)  and  (25). 
Thus, compounds with lààa’z  are treated as single grammatical units. 

The  inviolability  of  these  compounds,  however,  can  be  accounted  for 
without treating them as heads. It is well known, for instance, that English 
phrasal idioms such as “kick the bucket”  also resist syntactic extraction: 

26.  *What did Mike kick? (on idiomatic reading) 
 
27.  *Mike’s bucket was kicked by the Mafia. 
Nevertheless, “kick the bucket” has the internal structure of an ordinary 
VP, and behaves like a standard VP in the structures in which it appears.  
Di  Sciullo  and  Williams  (1988)  reconcile  the  semantic  irregularity  and 
grammatical regularity of phrasal idioms by calling them “listed syntactic 
units”:  they  are  constructed  according  to  normal  rules  of  syntax,  but  are 
given special status as “listed” lexical items (that is, items whose meanings 
are  noncompositional,  and  thus  must  be  given  their  own  listings  in  the 
lexicon).  This  analysis  can  be  extended  to  verbal  compounds  such  as 
ryu’lààa’z in SLQZ. 

                                                      
2 SLQZ, like other Zapotec languages, regularly allows apparent Principle C vio-
lations such the binding of “Mike” by “Mike”  in these examples. The second, 
bound copy is not referential and behaves semantically like a bound variable. 
This phenomenon is described  in detail in Lee 2003. 

 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 

61 

This  raises  the  issue  of  why  nominal  expressions  such  as  lààa’z  and 
byùuzh  in the compounds shown above are not forced to raise out of VP 
into agreement projections, as do other nominals generated within VP.  A 
possibility is that these expressions are blocked from raising out of VP for 
the  same  reasons  “bucket”  cannot  be  extracted  from  the  idiomatic  VP 
“kick the bucket”:  since “bucket” is not referential in this context, it can-
not be questioned or manipulated in the same way as a normal syntactic 
object. The fact that “bucket”  may not be modified for number agreement 
(“*Careless drivers kick their buckets every day”) suggests that it may not 
even raise to AgrOP, where such features are checked, in the contexts in 
which it appears. If this is the case, then lààa’z  “heart” in ryu’lààa’z and 
byùuzh    “meat  pieces  on  chicharrones”  in  ruhnybyùuzh  may  likewise  be 
posited to be nonreferential: since there are no actual hearts or meat frag-
ments involved in either of the verbal expressions described above.3 

To  sum  up,  there  is  no  way  to  derive  the  correct  form    of  multimor-
phemic verb roots such as ryu’lààa’z  “like” by head movement.  The fact 
that  even  compound  words  show  the  morpheme  ordering  of  phrases 
strongly  argues  against  the  possibility  that  they  might  be  heads.  This, 
along  with  the  syntactic  distribution  and  other  morphological features of 
SLQZ verbs, support the idea that SLQZ verbs are XPs rather than heads. 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 

The previous sections showed why no workable clause structure for SLQZ 
could be derived if inflected verbs were posited as heads: they appear in-
terchangeably with nominal and prepositional phrases in a number of syn-
tactic  constructions,  and  their  morphological  structure  cannot  be  derived 
by head movement. This section will propose and show an actual basic tree 
structure for SLQZ and show how it accounts for the seemingly irregular 
distribution and form of inflected verbs. 

Such a structure must meet two criteria:  first, for learnability reasons, it 
must  not diverge radically from the basic structures posited for other 
lan
guages. In other words, a child learning SLQZ as a first language must 
ac
quire not a radically different tree structure, but simply a different mecha-
nism  for  deriving  the  correct  position  of  the  verb.  Second,  this  structure 
must also be able to account for, in a principled way, all the possible varia-
tions of verbal form caused by verbal suffixes. 
The basic structure I propose is as follows: 
                                                       
3 I leave  aside the  interesting  question  of   why  idioms such as  “take advantage 
of ”   do  allow  syntactic  manipulation  (e.g, “Advantage  was taken of  John’s 
weakness”). 

 

62      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

28. 

CP

C

C’

NegP

Neg’ 

Neg

MoodP

Mood’

Mood

TP

T’

T

AspP 

Asp’

Asp

 AgrSP

AgrS’

AgrS

AgrOP

AgrO’

AgrO

VPasp

V’

(VPcaus) 

V

V’

V

VPstem

V’

V

where VPasp is  headed by a light verb that serves to mark tense, aspect, 
and occasionally mood (this to be justified and further explained below); 
VPcaus    is  headed  by  a  causative  verb  marker  (cf.  Hale  and  Keyser  
1993,  Kural 1996, Chomsky 1995) when the verb is causative/transitive,  
and  VPstem    is  headed  by  the  verb  stem  itself.    (As  previously  noted,  

.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ
3

63 

there are a number of other projections that may appear below VPasp, inside 
the verbal complex, but these are omitted for the preceding tree for exposi-
tional simplicity. There is also evidence for a number of projections above 
NegP, rather than a single position CP (consistent with proposals by Rizzi 
1996,  among  others).  Detailed  evidence  for  split  CP  projections  will  be 
given in the next chapter. 

Thus, the inflected verb that raises to TP is the set of VP shells domi-
nated by VPasp. Subjects and objects, which are generated within the VPs, 
raise out to AgrSP and AgrOP, respectively. The VP, containing the traces 
of these arguments, then raises through the specifier of AspP (where aspec-
tual features are checked) to the specifier of TP, where tense features of the 
verb are checked. 

In  the  following  subsections,  I  will  account  for  the  ordering  of  func-
tional  projections   proposed  above.  First,  I  will  address  the  internal 
struc
ture  of  the VP complex itself; then I will discuss the ordering of the 
remaining clausal projections. 

 

3.3.1   Projections within the VP Complex 

 The Tense/Aspect Marker 
The  leftmost  morpheme  in  the  SLQZ  verbal  complex  is  the  obligatory 
marker for tense, aspect, and mood.  If, as argued, inflected verbs in SLQZ 
are  raised  VPs  rather  than  raised Vs, then the only way to derive aspect 
markers on the left edge of the verb is to generate them there as part of a 
higher VP shell. This higher VP projection, then, must be that in which the 
actual “aspect markers” of SLQZ are generated:  VPasp in the tree above. 
(VPasp is not to be confused with AspP, which is a separate, higher projec-
tion in which VPasp is licensed.) The light verb in VPasp has aspectual fea-
tures  that  are  checked  by  movement  of  the  VP  complex  dominated  by 
VPasp through AspP and (depending on its form) tense features checked 
by movement through TP. 

The internal structure of a simple VP consisting of a verbal stem and as-
pect marker, then, is as follows (abstracting away from the base-generated 
positions of extracted arguments): 

 

 

64      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

29. 

 

V’

VPasp

 V
  b-
perf. 

VPstem

  V’

V 
tàa’z
hit

 
This VP complex dominated by VPasp, then, is what raises through AspP 
and  TP  to  appear  clause-initially  in  structures  such  as  the  following: 
 

30.    B- tàa’z Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
perf-hit   Mike         Felipe 
 
“Mike hit Felipe” 
 
 
 
The  representation  of  aspect  markers  as  verbs  is  not  unprecedented. 
Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria (1997) note that Basque progressives are 
formed with the verb “be engaged in”: 

 

 
31.  Anaia leihoa     apur-tze-n            ari da 
 

Anaia  window  break-NOM-in    engage AUX (be) 
“Anaia is engaged in breaking the window/Anaia is breaking the 
window” 
(Basque: Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997, p. 5) 

 
 
The  verbal  status  of  the  constituent  expressing  Progressive  aspect  in 
Basque is also consistent with their proposal that Aspect is predicative as 
well as locative.4 

 

 

                                                      

4  Suggestive  evidence  for  the  verbal  status  of  SLQZ  aspect  markers  comes 
from  the  homophony  between  certain  aspect  markers  and  verbs  with  similar 
meanings. The progressive marker ca-, for instance, closely resembles the word 
caa, which can be used either as the question word “where” or  as a verb meaning 
“to hang” or  “to be spread around over”.  A diachronic relation between these 
elements  would  be  consistent  with  the  proposal  that  progressive  markers  in  a 
number of languages are historically derived from expressions of spatial location 
(Bybee, et al (1994), cited in Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997.) 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

65 

 Directional Markers 
The directional markers, reduced forms of  rìe’d  “come” and  rihah  “go”, 
appear after the tense/aspect markers and before the causative marker and 
verb  stem.  Thus,  in  verbal  complexes  with  directional  markers,  the 
tense/aspect marker appears on “come” and “go”, rather than on the verbal 
stem  itself.  I  assume  that  directional  markers  are  generated  as  heads  of 
their own verbal projections, above the verbal stem and causative marker, 
but  below  the  tense/aspect  marker.  Ridta’uh  “comes  and  eats”,  for  in-
stance, has the following internal structure:   

32. 
       
       
       

VPasp

 V’

 VPdir

V  
r- 
(hab)

 V’

 VP

 V 
id 

 (come)

V’ 

V 

 ta’uhw
 (eat) 

In  the  following  examples  from  ML,  for  instance,  the  habitual  aspect 
marker r- appears before the directional marker, rather than directly on the 
verb stem: 

hab-wander.around  
“wanders around” 

 

 r-i-canzàa  
hab-go-wander.around  
“goes and wanders around” 

33.    r-canzàa  
 
 
 
34. 
 
 
 
35. 
 
 
 
36. 
 
 
                          

 r-a’uhw  
hab-eat   
“eats” 
 

 r-id-ta’uhw  
hab-come-eat    
“comes and eats” 

 

66      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

This patterning is superficially reminiscent of what Jaeggli and Hyams  
(1993)  dubbed  ‘aspectual’  “come”  and  “go”  constructions  in  English. 
These constructions, like the SLQZ examples above, involve “come” and 
“go” taking verbal complements without any tense inflection of their own: 

 
37.  Come talk to me 
 
38.  Whenever I have time, I go watch a movie 
 
SLQZ  directional  markers,  however,  are  far  less  constrained  syntacti-
cally and semantically than English aspectual “come” and “go”. For one, 
SLQZ directional markers may take a full range of tense/aspect prefixes, 
while  aspectual  “come”  and  “go”  may  not  show  any  tense  or  agreement 
marking: 

 
39.  *You came talk to him yesterday 
 
Unlike their English counterparts, SLQZ directional markers are not re-

stricted to constructions with volitional subjects: 

where at hab-come-appear water? 
“Where does the water come out?” (ML 1999) 

 
40.  *Pieces of driftwood come wash up on the shore 
 
41.  Calii loo r-id-dicah nnyihs? 
 
 
 
Jaeggli and Hyams suggest that aspectual “come” and “go” assign sec-
ondary theta roles to their subjects, thus leading to the constraint that only 
volitional  subjects  may  appear  in  these  constructions.  This  is  clearly  not 
the case in SLQZ: ML list a number of  other commonly used verb forms 
with directional markers in which no agentivity is required of the subject 
(as seen above) . This suggests that SLQZ “come” and “go” are interpreted 
as purely directional, and do not assign secondary theta roles to the sub-
jects of the verbs they modify.  

I leave aside a more detailed analysis of these constructions for future 

research. 

The Causative Projection 

The morphological causative marker surfaces directly to the left of the 
verbal  stem.  As  described  in  the  previous  chapter,  this  marker  takes  a 
number of forms: it either appears as a distinct morpheme (often s- or z-) 
or  as  fortition  of  a  lenis  initial  stem  consonant.  Examples  (42)  and  (43) 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

67 

show  the  addition  of  the  causative  morpheme  z-  on  the  left  edge  of  the 
verb stem; examples (44) and (45) show causation marked by fortition of 
the stem-initial lenis consonant zh:- to x:-  : 

 r-z-ihnnih 
hab-caus-get.light 
“turns on (a light)” 

 r-ihnnih 
hab-get.light 
“gets light” (of the sky, before dawn) 

 
42. 
 
 
 
43. 
 
 
 
44. 
 
 
 
45. 
 
 
  
Many  SLQZ  morphological  causatives  are  transitive  alternates  of  mo-

 r-x:ùu’nny 
 hab-caus.run 
 “makes (something) run” 

 r-zh:ùu’nny 
 hab-run 
 “runs” 

nadic predicates best translated in English as passives.5 

 

 
 

 
46.  
 
 Non-causative 
rihihw  “gets ground up” 
rzh:ììi’  “is milked, is squeezed,  
is wrung” 
ryèe’t   “is called” 
 
 Following a number of accounts (Hale and Keyser 1992, Kural 1996, 
Baker 1996 among others), I posit this causative marker to be the head of a 
VP shell that takes the verbal stem as its complement. Because causative 
markers appear after aspect and directional markers, I assume they head a 
VP shell below VPasp and VPdir, but above VPstem: 

Causative 
rziuhw  “grinds up, pulverizes” 
rx:ììi’  “milks, squeezes, 
wrings” 
rzèe’t  “mentions, calls” 

 

 

                                                      
5  Munro  (course  lectures,  1997)  notes,   however,  that  the  semantic  relation  
between causative/non-causative verb forms in SLQZ is often idiosyncratic and 
not  strictly  causative,  even  though  the  addition  of  an  additional  argument  to 
thematic  grid  is  generally  involved:  for  instance  the  morphological  causative 
alternate to rguèe’ll  “gets fast, does fast” is rsaguèe’ll  “is kind enough to, 
does a favor and”. 

 

68      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

47. 

         

 
VPasp

 VPdir

 VPcaus

 VPstem

 
SLQZ  also  has  a  periphrastic  causative  construction  formed  with  the 

verb “make”: 

 
48.  Laarëng b-èèi’ny-rëng        b-zh:ùu’nny caba’i 
3p.prox perf-make-3p.prox perf-run       horse 
 
 
“They made the horse run”  
 
The periphrastic and morphological causative constructions show con-
trasts in meaning as well as form.  While periphrastic causative construc-
tions express the idea of indirect causation, their morphological causative 
counterparts  imply  a  stronger  causative  relationship  between  the  causer 
and causee. This contrast appears in the following examples: the first an 
example  of  a  periphrastic  causative  construction,  the  second  its  morpho-
logical causative version: 

perf-make Felipe    irr-dance   Mike 
“Felipe made Mike dance” 

 
49.  B-èèi’ny Li’eb     [y-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly] 
 
 
 
50.  B-z-yàa’ah         Li’eb Gye’eihlly 
 
 
The first sentence can mean Felipe enabled  Mike to dance by  paying 
his fees for a dance contest, for instance. The second can only mean that 
Felipe  physically  dragged  Mike  onto  the  dance  floor  and  danced  him 
around. I will call the first reading the “indirect” causative reading, and the 
second the “direct” causative reading. 

perf-cause-dance Felipe Mike 
“Felipe made Mike dance/ Felipe danced Mike around” 

The correlation between indirect and direct causative readings and peri-
phrastic  and  morphological  causative  constructions  has  been  noted 
crosslinguistically. Kural (1996) notes that such correlations hold in Hun-
garian and Turkish, for example. I assume, following Kural, that periphras-
tic  causative  constructions  in  SLQZ  are  biclausal  (as  indicated  by  the 
brackets  in  (49)),  and  morphological  causative  constructions  are  mono-
clausal. A detailed examinination of  causative constructions in SLQZ is 
outlined in Casillas (1995). 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

69 

Secondary Roots 
SLQZ verbs may contain bound morphemes that appear on the right edge 
of  the  verbal  stem,  but  before    adverbial  suffixes  and  subject  agreement 
markers. These markers, which differ from other postverbal suffixes in that 
they attach only to verbs and not to other constituents, have been labelled 
“secondary roots” by Munro (course lectures, 1997). 

Secondary roots, as their name implies, also differ from adverbial suf-
fixes in that their presence is obligatory  in certain lexical entries: certain 
secondary roots are thus not productive.  A number of SLQZ verbs (mostly 
denoting  propositional  attitudes  and  emotional  states),  for  instance, 
are  formed  with  the  secondary  root  lààa’z  “heart”,  whose  use  is  not 
produc

tive: 

51. Some verbs formed with the secondary root lààa’z 
ryu’lààa’z  “likes” 
 (ryu’uh “enters” + lààa’z “heart”) 
 
rinèelààa’z  “keeps in mind”  
(rinèe “takes”+ lààa’z “heart”) 
 
 rza’clààa’z  “wants” 
(?? + lààa’z “heart”) 
 
rzalààa’z  “remembers, is aware of ” 
(?? + lààa’z “heart”) 
 
rnnàa’azlààa’z  “does a good deed for” 
(rnnàa’az “grabs,touches”+ lààa’z  

“heart”) 

rni’ìi’bylààa’z “worries, is concerned” 
 (rni’ìi’by “moves”+lààa’z“heart”) 
 
rgwinylààa’z  “feels sad, feels sorrowful” 
(?? + lààa’z “heart”)   
In some cases, the first part of these compounds can be identified as an 
independent  verb:  the  first  morpheme  in  rni’ìi’bylààa’z  “worries”  is  the 
verb  rni’ìi’by  “moves,  makes  a  movement”,    the  first  morpheme  in 
rinèelààa’z “keeps in mind” is the verb rinèe “takes, takes along”; and the 
first morpheme in ryu’lààa’z “likes” is the phrasal (phonologically short-
ened) form of the verb ryu’uh “enters”. 

In  other  cases,  the  semantic  contribution  of  the  first  morpheme  of  the 
compound  is  less  clear:  ML’s  dictionary  lists  no  independent  entry  for  
rgwiny  (nor anything that looks enough like it to be a possible source for 
it), for instance. 

 

70      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

Another  example  of  a  secondary  root  is  rrei’cy/  arrei’cy    “upside 

down”. 

def-hang-upside.down-3s.prox 
“It’s hanging upside down”   (ML, p.281) 

 
52.  Z-èei’by-arrei’cy-ëng 
 
 
 
This is an example of a secondary root which, unlike lààa’z  , may be 
used productively. This also shows that secondary roots include a  number 
of grammatical categories: they may be nominal (as is lààa’z) or preposi-
tional (as is rrei’cy/ arrei’cy ) 

I thus consider verbs containing secondary roots to be verbal compound 

Secondary roots also appear to be syntactically, as well as semantically, 
bound to the verb theme: they raise along with the verb theme in contexts 
involving  verb  movement,  such  as  negation.  In  (53),  the  verb  “forget”, 
formed  with  the  secondary  root  -lààa’z  “heart”,  behaves  as  a  single unit 
that undergoes movement under clausal negation: 

words.  

 
53.  Cë’ity n-yaannlààa’z-dya’ Gye’eihlly  
 

neg     subj-forget-dya’         Mike 
“Mike didn’t forget 
 
n-gyaan   Gye’eihlly bèe’cw 
subj-feed Mike          dog 
to feed the dog” 

 
 
 
I will assume that secondary roots are generated in XP shells below the 

main verb: this forces them to raise when the higher VP raises.  

 

The Comitative Applicative Marker nèe 
Another commonly used  secondary root is the comitive applicative marker 
nèe  ,  which  may  also  appear  on  the  right  edge  of  the  verb.  Nèe    differs 
from secondary roots such as lààa’z  in that its use is productive.  Nèe  in-
creases the valence of the verb by allowing the presence of an additional 
argument, generally an additional subject or, less commonly, a direct ob-
ject participant. For this reason, I gloss it “with”. Below are some typical 
examples of its usage (examples provided by Munro (p.c.)): 

 
54.  B-da’uw-nèe  Li’eb Gye’eihlly gueht 
 
 

perf-eat-with Felipe  Mike    tortilla 
“Felipe ate tortillas with Mike” 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

71 

55.  B-da’uw-nèe  Li’eb bzyààa’ gueht 
perf-eat-with  Felipe bean    tortilla 
 
 
“Felipe ate tortillas with beans” 
As these examples show, the added argument appears immediately after 
the main subject: the added subject “Mike” appears immediately after the  
subject  “Felipe”  in  (54),  and  the  added  object  “beans”  likewise  appears 
immediately  after  the  subject  (but  before  the  direct  object  “tortillas”)  in 
(55).  The fact that arguments introduced by -nèe, regardless of their own 
thematic  status  as  added  subjects  or  objects,  occupy  a  fixed  position be-
tween  subjects and direct objects suggests the existence of a specific li-
censing projection for comitative arguments. This projection must be dis-
tinct  from  the  position  in  which  indirect  objects  appear,  since  indirect 
objects obligatorily surface after direct objects, not before them: 

56.  B-dëihdy Gye’eihlly bx:àady Li’eb 
 
perf-give Mike grasshoppers Felipe 
 
“Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe” 
 
57.  *B-dëihdy Gye’eihlly Li’eb bx:àady  
 
perf-give Mike Felipe grasshoppers  
 
“Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe”  
 
The latter example can only have the reading “Mike gave Felipe to the 

grasshoppers”. 

Additional indirect objects generally may not be introduced with nèe:   
58.  B-dëihdy Gye’eihlly bx:àady       Li’eb 
perf-give Mike         grasshoppers Felipe 
 
 
“Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe” 
 
59.  *B-dëihdy-nèe Gye’eihlly bx:àady        Li’eb Lia Oliieb 
 
 
 
(While (59) is ungrammatical with the interpretation shown, it is allow-
able if “Felipe” is construed as an added subject participant.  An allowable 
interpretation,  then,  would  be  “Mike,  along  with  Felipe,  gave  the  grass-
hoppers to Olivia”). 

perf-give-with  Mike          grasshoppers Felipe Ms.Olivia 
“Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe and Olivia” 

The only exceptions to this constraint are certain unergative verbs such 
as “talk” and “sing”, which allow indirect objects (such as “Olivia” in (60) 
and “Felipe” in (61)) to be introduced by nèe : 

60.  Al         w-nii-nèe       Gye’eihlly Lia Oliieb 
already perf-talk-with Mike         Ms. Olivia 
 
 
“Mike already talked to Olivia” 
 

 

72      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

61.  B-ìi’lldy-nèe  Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
perf-sing-with Mike         Felipe 
 
 
“Mike sang to Felipe” 
 
Interestingly,    the  latter  example  could  mean  either  “Mike  sang  to 
Felipe” (in which case Felipe is an observer of the singing) or “Mike sang 
with Felipe” (in which case Felipe is a participant in the singing). This is 
reminiscent of the similar ambiguity of  speak with in English: “Mike al-
ready spoke with Olivia” could mean either Mike and Olivia participated 
equally in the conversation or that Mike merely told Olivia something and 
she only listened. 

Nèe  appears after any other secondary roots that may appear (such as 
lààa’z “heart” and rrei’cy “upside down” in the examples below), but be-
fore adverbial suffixes such as the modal suffix -zhya’ “might”: 

 

 

hab-gets.caught.heart-with-3s.prox Mike 
“He sighs with Mike”              (P. Munro, p.c.) 

def-stand.upside-down-with-1s Mike 
I’m standing upside-down with Mike  (P. Munro, p.c.) 

 
62.  R-gàa’lààa’z-nèe’-ng                 Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
63.  Z-uurrei’cy-ni-a’                  Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
64.  Z-auw-nèe-zhya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb gueht 
 
 
 
Although nèe’  superficially resembles applicative markers in other lan-
guages  (that  is,  it  is  a  verbal  affix  that  licenses  the  presence  of  an  addi-
tional argument),  its usage is confined to comitative contexts: it cannot, 
for example, introduce benefactive or instrumental arguments, as do appli-
cative markers in other languages: 

def-eat-with-might Mike       Felipe tortilla 
“Mike might eat tortillas with Felipe” 
 

perf-catch   Mike     grasshopper with net 
“Mike caught grasshoppers with a net” 

 
65.  W-nnààaz Gye’eihlly bx:àady cuann gyìihx 
 
 
 
66.  *W-nààa’z-nèe  Gye’eihlly gy:ihx bx:àady 
 
 
The  constraint  against  applied  benefactive/instrumental  arguments 
li
censed  by  nèe  is  also  reflected  in the possible interpretation  of  the 
follow

pef-catch-with   Mike          net       grasshopper 
“Mike caught grasshoppers with a net” 

ing: 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

73 

what perf-eat-with-2s.inf tortilla 
“What did you eat tortillas with?” 

67.  Xi b-da’uhw-nèe-u’      gueht? 
 
 
 
This  can  only  be interpreted as “what other food did you eat besides 
tillas?”.  It  could  not  be  followed  up  felicitously  with  an  answer  such 

tor
as  “with a fork”, for example. 

Nèe  may  also appear sentence initially. In this context, it has the mean-
ing “too”, and takes scope over the immediately following nominal argu-
ment, which appears preverbally: 

too Felipe perf-eat grasshopper 
“FELIPE ate grasshoppers, too” (along with other people)  

 
68.  Nèe Li’eb b-da’uhw bx:àady 
 
 
 
69.  Nèe bx:àady       b-da’uhw Li’eb 
too grasshopper perf-eat Felipe 
 
“Felipe  ate  GRASSHOPPERS  too”  (along  with  eating  other 
things) 

 
Thus, apart from the cases with “sing” and “talk”, nèe  does not contrib

ute 
additional thematic roles to a sentence.  Rather, it expresses the presence 
guments. 
of additional entities that appear in parallel with already licensed ar
Now I address the question of the syntactic status of nèe.  Since it raises 
along with verbs it modifies (as seen in (64), where it raises along with a 
the verb to the left of the modal clitic zhya’) it must form a syntactic unit 
with the verb. The fact that nèe  raises along with the verb it modifies is 
also  seen  in  negation  constructions,  where  the  verb  and  nèe    appear  be-
tween the two morphemes used to express clausal negation: 

 

 

 
70.  B-gyàa’a-nèe  Lia Oliieb Gye’eihlly pehr cë’ity   
 

perf-dance-with Ms. Olivia Mike but    neg 
“Olivia danced with Mike, but  she didn’t  

 n-gyàa’a-nèe-dy-ëng Li’eb 
subj-dance-with-neg-3s.prox Felipe 
dance with Felipe” 

 
This suggests that nèe, like the secondary roots, is generated as a com-

plement of the verbal stem: 

74      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

71. 

 
VPasp

VPcaus

 VPstem

 

 

 XP

nèe

 
I will set aside the question of the exact categorial status of nèe. Appli-
cative  markers  have  been  analyzed  as  incorporated  prepositions  (Baker 
1988, den Dikken 1993) or as higher predicates that take the VP and its ar-
guments  as  its  own  arguments  (Baker  1996,  Pearson  1997,  Nyonyani 
1996).  Since  these  analyses  were  mostly  motivated  by  the  syntactic  and 
semantic behavior of benefactive, rather than comitative, constructions, it 
is probable that they may not be relevant for the analysis of nèe.  

If nèe is indeed generated as a complement of the verbal stem, this fact 
would have a number of consequences for the internal structure of the rest 
of the VP. For one, it raises the question (which I have not yet addressed 
specifically)  of  exactly  where  in  the  extended  VP  structure  subjects  and 
objects  are  generated.  If  the  projection  headed  by  nèe  is  generated  as  a 
complement  of  the  verbal  stem,  then  objects  of  transitive  verbs—which 
have standardly been assumed to be generated as complements of verbs—
would have to be generated elsewhere. 

Consider, for example, a sentence with nèe  and a transitive verb: 
 
72.  B-da’uhw-nèe  Gye’eihlly ra mnii’iny gueht 
perf-eat-with Mike           plur child   tortilla 
 
 
“Mike ate tortillas with the children” 
 
Here, there are three arguments (“Mike”, “the children” and “tortillas”) 
that must be generated in VP, and that must raise out of VP to their respec-
tive agreeement projections before the VP itself raises to TP.  Thus, a pos-
sible structure for the VP “eat with” in (72) might be as follows: 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

75 

73. 

 

         

VP asp

V’ 

 

 

V asp
 b 
(perf) 

 VP

 DP

V’ 

Gye’eihlly
(Mike)

V  
-da’ uw
(e at) 

 XP

 X’

X  

nèe 
(with)

 DP

ra mnii’iny
(the children)

The problem is clear: the subject, “Mike”, can be assumed to be gener-
ated  as  the  specifier  of  the  VP  headed  by  “eat”.  The  comitative  phrase 
headed  by  nèe  is  generated  as  the  complement  of  “eat”.  This,  however, 
leaves no logical place for the object, “tortillas”, to be generated. Although 
there are two empty specifier slots left in the tree (the specifiers of XP and 
VPasp), neither would be a plausible place to generate the object: for one, 
the presence of nèe  or an aspect marker does not entail that the sentence at 
hand will contain a direct object (since nèe may appear with intransitive 
verbs  and  aspect  markers  appear  obligatorily  in  SLQZ).  Constraints 
against  generating  arguments  in  random,  non-selecting  projections  have 
been well motivated in linguistic literature: among these is the Uniformity 
of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH) (Baker 1988): 

 
74. 

Identical thematic relationships between items are represented by 
identical   structural  relationships  between  those items at the level
 of D-structure. 
(Baker 1988, p. 46) 

Since  direct  objects  are    selected  by  the  semantic  requirements  of  the 
verb, it follows from the UTAH that all direct objects must be generated in 
the same structural relation with the verb. Clearly, projections that appear 
with  all  verbs  (such  as  VPasp)  or  those  that  appear  only  optionally,  and 
with verbs of varied valences (such as the projection headed by nèe) , do 
not meet this requirement. 

Thus, direct objects, which are specifically selected by transitive verbs, 
must be generated within the VP headed by the transitive verb itself. If the 
optional comitative projection is generated as a complement of VP, as ar-
gued,  this  suggests  that  transitive  verbs  contain  more  layers  of  structure 

 

76      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

than assumed so far, and one of the projections in this structure houses the 
direct object.  

The  idea  that  verbs,  even  those  that  appear  monomorphemic,  may  be 
underlyingly  constructed  from  multiple  VP  projections,  has  been  moti-
vated  by  both  syntactic  and  semantic  factors  (Larson  1988,  Hale  and 
Keyser  1994,  Kural  1996).  Kural,  for  instance,  posits  the  existence  of 
“elementary  predicates”  (realized  in  the  syntax  as  phonologically  null 
verbs) with inchoative and causative functions: when combined with spe-
cific  lexical  items    via  incorporation,  these  predicates  determine  the  va-
lence and interpretation of the verb. For instance, the English verb “sink” 
may have either an inchoative, intransitive reading (as in “the boat sank”) 
or a transitive, causative reading ( as in “the navy sank the boat”). The dif-
ference  in  meaning  and  argument  structure  between  these  forms  results 
from  the  presence  of  phonologically  null  causative  or  inchoative  predi-
cates.  Hale and Keyser likewise posit the existence of phonologically null 
verbal  heads  that  contribute  to  the  syntactic  and  semantic  structure  of 
verbs: one configuration that they propose is that transitive verbs consist of 
two embedded VPs, with the agent generated as the specifier of the higher 
(causative) VP and the theme (affected argument) as specifier of the lower 
VP: 
 
75. 

VP

 agent 

 V’

 V

  VP

 theme 

V’ 

V 

 
The verb itself raises through both VPs. (For instance, a verb that may 
surface  in  a  structure  such  as  (75),  for  instance,  is  “shelve”  as  in  “Mike 
shelved  the books”. 

If we assume, then, that transitive verbs such as “eat”  contain two em-
bedded VPs (not counting VPasp), then an additional position for the gen-
eration of direct objects emerges: the specifier of the lower VP. Thus, the 
base-generated  structure  for  (72),  “Mike  ate  tortillas  with  the  children”, 
would be as follows: 

 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

77 

76. 

VPasp

V

’

VPcaus

V
b-

(perf)   DP            V’

’

Gye  eihlly
(Mike)

V

VPstem

DP

V

’

gueht         V        XP 

(tortilla)

-da’uw
(eat)                 X

’

                                                    

X        DP 

nèe
(with)   ra mnii iny 

(the children) 

 
A  possibility  I  will  consider  is  that  the  VP  shell  in  which  subjects  of 
transitive  verbs  are  generated  is  the  causative  projection  previously  de-
scribed.  This  would  mean  that  all  transitive  verbs  in  SLQZ  have  active 
causative projections, even if they have no overt phonological expression.  
This  possibility  is  consistent  with  that  proposed  by  Hale  and  Keyser 
(1994). 

This structure also suggests that the added argument is not coordinated 
directly with any of the other arguments: in (76), for instance,  the added 
subject  argument  “the  children”  is  not  syntactically  coordinated  with  the 
actual  subject  “Mike”.  This  idea  is  supported  by  the  fact  that both addi-
tional subjects and objects introduced by  nèe surface in the same position 
between  AgrSP and AgrOP, as seen in (54) and (55). The fact that this po-
sition (which I take to  be an oblique case-licensing agreement projection) 
is not associated with any particular thematic role suggests that arguments 
that land there must be taken to be syntactically distinct from actual sub-
jects and objects. (It could be argued that the exact thematic interpretation 
of arguments introduced by nèe  is determined only by context.) The status 
of arguments introduced by nèe, then,  could be considered roughly analo-
gous to the status of optional agent/experiencer arguments introduced with 
“by-phrases”  in  English  passives:  while  arguments  introduced  with  “by” 
are interpreted as external arguments, they behave syntactically as oblique 
arguments, and differ semantically from typical external arguments in that 
their presence is purely optional. 

 

78      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

a 

Another issue raised by the structure in (76) is the base-generated posi-
tion of the argument introduced by nèe:    if all other arguments are gener-
ated as specifiers,  why is the argument introduced by  nèe   generated as 
complement?  This  can  be  justified by the behavior of  preverbal nèe in 
examples  such  as  (77),  repeated  from  above: when fronted to preverbal 
posi
tion (and given the reading “too”), nèe always precedes the argument it 
in

Felipe  too   perf-eat grasshopper 
“FELIPE ate grasshoppers, too” 

too Felipe perf-eat grasshopper 
“FELIPE ate grasshoppers, too” (along with other people)  

troduces: 
 
77.   Nèe Li’eb b-da’uw bx:àady 
 
 
 
78.  *Li’eb nèe b-da’uw bx:àady 
 
 
 
This suggests that nèe  and the argument it introduces raise together as a 
unit. The fact that nèe is used in these contexts to introduce actual subjects 
and objects, rather than  additional subject or object participants, suggests 
that nèe in these cases might be base-generated, along with the argument it 
precedes, in the specifier of one of the VP shells, rather than as an embed-
ded  complement  of  VP  itself.  For  instance,  in  (76),    the  subject  XP  nèe  
Li’eb “Felipe too” may be generated in the specifier of  VPcaus: 

 
79. 

 
VPasp

V

’

V

VPcaus

XP

V

’

nèe Li

’

eb

V

VPstem

V

’

V

 
This in turn suggests that the projection headed by nèe, whatever it may 
be, is not a VP: the fact that nèe can be base-generated in argument posi-
tions, and that it is generated to the left of, rather than to the right of, the 
argument it introduces shows that it neither select arguments nor is gener-
ated in the syntax, like a normal VP.  

j-ieed Gye’eihlly nor’ty 

        irr-come Mike north 
      
to come to the US” 
 
81. 
 
 
 

 *Naa pahr Gye’eihlly g-àa’p muully pahr ch-ïlle’eh 
be    for    Mike       irr-have money for irr-be.allowed  
“Mike has to have money in order 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

79 

3.3.2 Matrix Clause Projections 
Now  I  turn  to  the  hierarchical  structure  of  the  remainder  of  the  matrix 
clause. I assume the basic relationship and ordering of Tense and Agree-
ment proposed by Pollock (1987). Since negation is generally clause-initial 
in SLQZ, I assume NegP is high (per Zanuttini 1989, among others).  

  The  placement  of  MoodP  above  TP  is  motivated  by  the  fact   that 
SLQZ modals appear directly above verbs, and no lexical material may in-
tervene between modals and verbs: 

80.  Naa pahr g-àa’p     Gye’eihlly muully pahr ch-ïlle’eh         
 
 
 

be    for   irr-have Mike       money for    irr-be.allowed 
“Mike has to have money in order 

j-ieed Gye’eihlly nor’ty 

         irr-come Mike north 
        to come to the US” 
The placement of MoodP below NegP is motivated by the fact that there 
are  a  number  of  cases  in  which  the  modal  interpretation  of  verbs  is 
changed  under  negation  (Lee  1996).  Negation  is  clause-initial  in  SLQZ; 
thus, negated verbs must raise above their normal landing position (TP) in 
order to reach NegP. This change in modal interpretation under negation 
suggests  that  negated  verbs  must  raise  through  MoodP  in  order  to  reach 
NegP, and in cases where modal features are active (such as when one of 
the three modal aspect markers is selected), the verb will receive a modal, 
rather than non-modal interpretation. 

  Verbs marked with Irrealis aspect, for instance, receive modal, rather 
than non-modal, interpretations under the standard clausal negation pattern 
exemplified in (17). Recall from Chapter 1 that verbs with Irrealis aspect 
may  have  either  “non-modal”  or  “modal”  interpretations:  the  non-modal 
interpretation,  which  surfaces  when  Irrealis-marked  verbs  appear in non-
negated matrix clauses, is an indicative future reading, as shown below: 

82.  G-wùa’ll-rëng li’ebr 
   
   
 

Irr-read-3p.prox books 
“They will read the books” 

 

80      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

  The  “modal”  reading  of  the  Irrealis  corresponds  to  some  uses  of  the 
subjunctive  in  Romance  languages,  or  the  reading  of  infinitival  comple-
ments of intensional verbs in English:  

 
83.  R-e’ihpy Lia Pa’amm làa’rëng g-wùa’ll-rëng li’ebr 
   
   
 
The modal reading  of Irrealis verbs is blocked in matrix clauses, which 

hab-tell Ms. Pam         3p.prox  irr-read-3p.prox book 
“Pam told them to read the books” 

always get the indicative future reading.  

  This constraint is both semantically and syntactically motivated.  As-
suming  Farkas’  (1995)  model  in  which  subjunctive  clauses  represent 
events  that  take  place  in  sets  of  possible  worlds  introduced  by  an  inten-
sional  predicate,  then  the  presence  of subjunctive-like readings of SLQZ 
Irrealis verbs in matrix clauses can be ruled out as redundant: matrix clause 
predicates are uttered in (and are presumed to be true in) the actual world 
of the speaker; they do not denote any possible worlds except the actual 
one.6 A matrix predicate such as runs in John runs, for example, can only 
be  interpreted  to  mean  that  John  is  running  in  the  actual  world  of  the 
speaker and listeners, not that he is running in some hypothetical situation. 
If modal readings are triggered by the raising of verbs to a pre-TP Mood 
projection, then raising of verbs to Mood in matrix clauses can be ruled out 
for reasons of economy: the extra move in unnecessary for the meaning of 
the sentence.  

  The  modal  reading  surfaces  obligatorily  when  Irrealis-marked  verbs 

undergo standard clausal negation, as seen below: 

 
84.  R-e’ihpy Lia Pa’amm  làa’rëng  
hab-tell  Ms. Pa’amm  3p.prox 
 
 
“Pam told them 
 
 
 
 

cë’ity g-wùa’ll-(dya)-rëng li’ebr 
 neg       irr-read-(dya’)-3p.prox book 
not to read the books”     

 
 

   “Pam told them they will not read the books” 

     

                                                      
6  An  obvious  exception  to  this  generalization  is  the  case  of  conditional  clauses 
(such as “If Mike comes early, tell him to wait for us”). Subjunctives are com-
monly  licensed  in  conditional  clauses  crosslinguistically.  In  SLQZ,  Irrealis 
verbs  in  clauses  introduced  by  bàllnah  “if”  receive  modal,  rather  than  non-
modal readings.  

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

81 

 
  A  distinct  ordering  of  negative  morphemes  surfaces  when  Irrealis 

verbs with non-modal  (indicative future) readings are negated: 

 
85.  Cë’ity-dy-ënn y-da’uhw-ënn gueht 
neg-dya’-1p   irr-eat-1p        tortilla 
   
   
“We won’t eat tortillas” 
 
  In contrast to the standard clausal negation pattern exemplified in (17) 
and  (84),  when  Irrealis  verbs  with  future  readings  are  negated,  the  mor-
phemes used to express negation, cë’ity  and dya’ , appear adjacent to each 
other,  rather  than  on  either  side  of  the  verb.  Another  difference  is  that  
pronominal subject agreement markers appear  twice:   once on the verb, 
and once directly after -dya’.  (In the previous example, for instance, the 
first-person-plural  marker  -ënn  obligatorily  appears  twice.)    Lexical  sub-
jects may also appear twice, but are only required after  
-dya’: 

 
86.  Cë’ity-dya’ Jwaany g-a’uhw (Jwaany) gueht 
   
   
 
A  syntactic  structure  for  this  alternate  negation  pattern  will  be  given 

neg-dya’       Juan     irr-eat (Juan) tortilla 
“Juan won’t eat tortillas” 

shortly.  

  The need for  this alternate  structure is a direct result of the interaction 
between MoodP and NegP: as seen in (84), Irrealis verbs are interpreted 
with  modal,  rather  than  non-modal,  readings  when  raised  to  NegP.  This 
suggests,  as  previously  argued,  that  MoodP  intervenes  between  the stan-
dard landing spot of non-negated matrix verbs (TP) and NegP. The rele-
vant movement of the VP through MoodP into NegP for (84), for example, 
is shown below:7 

 

                                                      
7 Iposit the placement of the negative marker -dya’ as the head of NegP for con-
venience here.  Its exact position, and reasons for its position, will be discussed 
in Chapter 5. 

 

82      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

87. 

 

NegP 

                

QPi                           Neg  
’

Q’           Neg        MoodP 

                           dya  

Q         VP                  ti         TP 

Cë’ity  
neg        gwùa ll                     

t i       AgrSP 

DP                 AgrOP 

-rëng              DP       ti
3p.prox         

 

 

 

li’ebr 
books 

 

 
 
Thus, a syntactically distinct construction must come into play when a 

negated Irrealis verb is to preserve its non-modal (future) interpretation. 

  This raises the question of what exactly is the underlying structure of 
the negated future Irrealis pattern in (85) and (86). The structure can be ac-
counted for as follows: Since the Irrealis verb itself cannot raise to NegP 
without passing through MoodP and thus receiving a modal interpretation, 
it remains in TP. The CP containing the Irrealis verb is embedded under a 
higher clause in which a covert existential predicate undergoes clausal ne-
gation. Thus, the underlying structure for a simple negated future Irrealis 
sentence such as (88), is as follows: 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

83 

88.  Cë’ity-dya’ Gye’eihlly y-tòo’oh ca’rr   
   
   
   

neg-dya’     Mike        irr-sell car 
“Mike won’t sell the car”  
NegP

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

Neg’

Neg
-dya’ 

MoodP

Mood’

Mood TP

T’

T AgrSP

DP
Gye’eihlly
(Mike)

LP

QP

Q

cë’ity
(neg)

Q’

VP

V’

V

(exist)

CP

ytòo’oh tsubj ca’rr
(sell
car)

  In this structure,  the matrix clause verb is a covert existential predicate 
negated by cë’ity. The QP headed by cë’ity, with the covert existential as 
its complement, raises through TP and MoodP into spec, NegP.  In order 
for this to occur without the complement of the covert existential (the em-
bedded CP) raising to NegP as well, the embedded CP must raise to the 
position marked LP. A full explanation of this position and its functions 
will be presented in the following section. 

 The    Irrealis  VP  remnant  ytòo’oh    “will  sell”  remains  in  spec,  TP  of  
the  embedded  clause.  The  embedded  clause  object    “car”  also  remains  
in  the  embedded  clause.  The  subject  “Mike”  raises  out  of  the  embedded 
clause  into  AgrSP  of  the  matrix  clause.  This  movement  is  motivated  
by  two  factors.  First,  since  the  covert  existential  verb  is  not  a  
theta-assigner,  it  can  act  as  a  raising  predicate.  Second,  Irrealis  comple-
ments  with  modal  readings  behave  as  restructuring  predicates  in  SLQZ; 
arguments  generated  within  them  may  undergo  long-distance  movement 
normally  disallowed   from  full  complement  clauses,  such  as   focus 

 

84      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

ment and  A-movement  of  subjects out of  the clause (see Lee 2003 

move
for details.)   

This  structure    for  Irrealis  negation  not  only  enables  the  lower  verb 
“sell” to remain in TP, it also gives the right semantic interpretation:  the 
negated covert existential verb takes scope over the event denoted by the 
embedded clause, giving the reading “there exists no future event of Mike 
selling the car”. 

  The  presence  of  a  covert  existential  verb  between  the  two  negative 
markers in the higher clause is consistent with the fact that the verb nu’uh  
“exists” may be phonologically null in negated contexts: 

neut-exist-3s.prox 
“He exists” 

89.  N-u’-ng 
   
   
 
90.  Cë’ity n-u’-dy-ëng 
   
   
 
91.  Cë’ity -dy-ëng 
   
   

neg-dya’-3s.prox 
“He doesn’t exist” 

neg    neut-exist-dya’-3s.prox 
“He doesn’t exist” 

 

 

The Position of Embedded Clauses 
This  structure,  however,  raises  a  crucial  question  for  the  VP-movement 
proposal: if matrix predicate (the XP containing the silent existential verb) 
raises to spec, TP, then to spec, NegP, then how can the embedded clause 
with  the  Irrealis  verb  remain  stranded  below  the  two  negative  particles? 
Since it is a complement of the matrix verb, wouldn’t it be forced to raise 
through the matrix clause to NegP as well? 

  The only way to derive the proper linear order of the sentence above 
under a VP-raising account is to raise the embedded CP out of the matrix 
VP to some higher projection (XP) before this VP raises to NegP: 

92. 

 

XP

VP

V’

V

 
 
 
While  this  may  appear  to  be  an  ad  hoc  mechanism  to  save  the  VP-
raising theory, it has  independent theoretical motivation in earlier work on 
case  and  theta-role  assignment  of  complement  clauses  (Emonds  1978, 

CP

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

85 

Stowell  1981,  among  others).  More  recently,  the  raising  of  complement 
clauses to higher projections has been posited as a means of handling ap-
parent cases of right-adjunction in a manner consistent with the principles 
of antisymmetry (Kayne 1997, Koopman (course lectures), Koopman and 
Szabolcsi 1998). 

  Stowell (1981) notes that while gerund clauses may appear as objects 
of  prepositions  and  as  subjects  of  complements  of  exceptional  case-
marking verbs, tensed clauses may not :  

(Stowell 1981, p.149) 

(Stowell 1981, p. 148) 

93.  He blamed it [on [Bill’s being too strict]]   
   
 
94.  *He blamed it [on [that Bill was too strict]]  
   
 
95. 
   
 
96.  *I consider [ [ that John came home] to be fortunate]]  
   
 
Furthermore,  tensed-clause complements may not appear directly after 

I consider[ [John’s having come home] to be fortunate]]  
(Stowell 1981, p. 149) 

(Stowell 1981, p. 149) 

tensed verbs; they must appear after any other complements that appear: 

 
97.  Paul knew from experience [that the law was unfair] 
 
98.  ?*Paul knew [that the law was unfair] from experience 
 
He postulates that the ungrammaticality of (94), (96),  and (98)  can be 
attributed to the clashing requirements of case and theta-role assignment in 
these structures. He assumes the following requirement  for theta role as-
signment (proposed in Chomsky 1981): 

 
99.  Theta-roles can only be assigned to A-chains that are headed by a 

position occupied by PRO or Case  
(Chomsky 1981, cited in Stowell 1981, p. 111) 

   
 
  Case  assignment,  however,  is  subject  to  a  number  of  constraints, 

among them the following: 

 
100.  The Case Resistance Principle (CRP):  

Case may not be assigned to a category bearing a Case-assigning 
feature 

        (Stowell 1981, p. 141) 

 

86      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

  Among  the  case-assigning  categories  is  Tense.  Thus,  tensed  clauses 
are  among  the  categories  subject  to the CRP, and are thus blocked from 
appearing in case-marked positions. 

  The ungrammaticality of (94) and (96) can thus be accounted for. The 
tensed clause subjects of the embedded clauses cannot receive case under 
the CRP. Because they do not receive case (and are not PRO), however, 
they  also  fail  to  be  properly  theta-marked.  The  derivations  thus  crash. 
Likewise, (98) is ruled out by the CRP: the tensed-clause complement con-
tains a case-assigning feature, but is in a position in which it may receive 
case-marking itself. 

  Stowell  notes  however,  that  there  are  a  number  of  cases  in  which 
tensed clauses appear as subjects or complements of tensed verbs in appar-
ent violation of the CRP: 

(Stowell 1981, p. 152) 

 (Stowell 1981, p. 159) 

101.  [That Brian dyed his hair] proves nothing           
   
 
102.  Paul already knows [that Jim lives with his sister]   
   
In the case of tensed-clause subjects, he suggests (adopting earlier ideas 
by  Emonds  (1976)  and  Koster  (1978)  that  the  tensed  clause  raises  to  a 
higher Topic position. This is supported by the fact that tensed clause sub-
jects only appear in constructions in which topics can also appear, and are 
blocked in environments in which topics may not appear (such as inside 
relative clauses): 

103.  *John’s  belief  [[that  you  took  the  course]  helped  you]  is  un-

founded 

        (Stowell 1981, p. 153) 
Stowell proposes that tensed clause complements of tensed verbs, such 
as that in (102) are also extraposed from their base (case-marked) position. 
He suggests (following Emonds 1976) that these extraposed clauses move 
rightward  to  a  postverbal  position  to  fulfill  the  CRP.    This  accounts  for 
clause-final position of the tensed-clause complements in (102). 

  Thus, the idea that clausal complements must move to positions dis-
tinct from their base-generated positions is not new or theoretically unmo-
tivated.  Stowell’s  proposals  can  be  easily  updated  to  be  consistent  
with  Minimalist principles and antisymmetry constraints: most obviously, 
it  must  be  assumed  that  tensed  complement  clauses  raise  leftward,  
not rightward, to fulfill the CRP. Also, the CRP itself can be restated in 
terms  of  feature  licensing  conditions:  since  case-assignment  is  now  as-
sumed  to  be  licensed  by  spec/head  agreement  within  AGR    rather  than  
by  head-government    by  the  verb  stem,  we  must  assume  that  tensed  
clause  complements  must  appear  in  positions  distinct  from  nominal  
complements  because  they  cannot  receive  the  case  features  assigned  by 

3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ

87 

AGR. (Alternately, as suggested Hilda Koopman (p.c.), raised complement 
clauses  may  move  through,  but  not  remain  in,  case-marking  agreeement 
projections.  In other words, clausal complements of tensed verbs raise to a 
licensing projection analogous to AGR, but that differs from the nominal 
agreement licensing projections in that it does not assign case. 

  This  projection,  which  I  will  call    L(icencing)P  (LP)  (following 
Koopman  and  Szabolczi  1997)  must  be  fairly  low  in  the  matrix  clause, 
since clausal complements follow subjects and objects of matrix verbs: 

perf-persuade Felipe Mike         [irr-sell Mike  car] 
“Felipe persuaded Mike to sell the car” 

104.  B-quiilly         Li’eb Gye’eihlly [y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr] 
   
   
 
I will tentatively assume that LP is directly below AgrOP. 

More on Root Clause Constituent Order 
Now I return to the ordering of other projections within the matrix clause. 
From  the  preceding  account  of  Irrealis  future  negation,  it    follows  that 
MoodP must be above TP: if it were below TP, then Irrealis verbs (as well 
as verbs markers with other modal aspects) would always be required to 
pass through and activate MoodP, and would always have only one, modal 
interpretation. As seen in the first part of this chapter, this is not the case. 
The  placement  of  the  modal  projection  above  TP  is  also  consistent  with 
Barbiers’ (1995) proposal that Dutch modals with non-epistemic readings 
take IP (=TP) complements. 

Rizzi (1996), among others,  has proposed that CP, like IP, should be 
viewed  as  a  set  of  separate  functional  projections,  including  Focus  and 
Topic, among others. There is strong evidence to support this in SLQZ. I 
will return to the internal structure of CP in Chapter 4. 

 The embedding of AspP under TP was proposed in Lee 1996 (and in-
dependently,  in  greater  detail,  by    Demirdache  and  Uribe-Exteberria 
(1997)). Both of these accounts motivate this structure by observing that 
Aspect  describes  the  temporal  status  of  an  event  within  a  certain  time 
frame: for example, a sentence with past tense such as “He built a house” 
describes an event temporally ordered before the time of speech (or before 
some  other  contextually  salient  time).  Aspect  describes  the  status  of  an 
event within a time frame denoted by Tense: “He was building a house”, 
for example, denotes an event that was in progress  during a past time.  

Demirdache  and  Uribe-Exteberria  further  suggest  that  Aspect  is  a  
predicate  that  selects  a  subpart  of  a  time  interval  denoted  by  Tense:   
They  define  Progressive  aspect,  for  example,  as  “a  spatio/temporal  
predicate  with  the  meaning  of  (with)in”.  Thus,  the  Progressive  aspect  in 
“He was building a house” selects a time frame within the past event of 
house-building. This time frame excludes the beginning and endpoints of 

 

88      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

the event; thus, no implication can be made as to whether the house in the 
sentence was actually completed or not. 

They  further  support  this  proposal  with  crosslinguistic  and  diachronic 
evidence.  A  number  of  languages  (such  as  French,  and  Dutch,  for  in-
stance), use prepositional phrases to express progressive events: 

105.  Jean est en train de courir 
 
Jean is in along of running 
“Jean is running”  
 
(French: Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997, p. 5) 

 

106.  Ik ben het huis aan het bouwen 
 
 

I  am   the house at the build 
“I’m building the house”  
(Dutch: Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997, p. 5) 

Thus,  there is crosslinguistic evidence that natural languages treat As-
pect  as  having  locative-like  functions    (Progressive  Aspect,  for  instance, 
locates events within a given time frame) and in some cases, expresses As-
pect in the grammar as a locative.  This will be a crucial point in the deri-
vation of Aspect in SLQZ. 

Summing  up,  the  structure  for  a  simple  sentence  in  SLQZ  can  be  de-

rived as follows: below is the base VP shell structure for (107): 

107. B-z-yàa’ah         Li’eb Gye’eihlly 
   

perf-caus-dance Felipe Mike 
“Felipe made Mike dance” 
 
 

VPasp

V

’

VPstem

Vb-
(perf)

DP

Li’ed
(Felipe)

V’

VPstem

V
z-
(caus)

DP

V’

Gye’eihlly

(Mike)

V

Yaa’ah
(dance)

 
 
                    
 
                
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
     
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 

89 

The  subject,  Li’eb,  “Felipe”,  base-generated  in  the  specifier  of  the 
causative  VP,  raises  to  spec,  AgrSP,  and  the  object,  Gye’eihlly,  “Mike”, 
base-generated in the specifier of the VP stem, raises to spec, AgrOP. The 
entire VP complex then raises to the specifier of AspP, then to the specifier 
of TP: 
108. 

TP

VPasp

V’

ti

V
B-

(perf)

VPcaus

V’

T’

T

AgrSP

DP
Lieb

i
(Felipe)

AgrS’

AgrS AgrOP

DP

AgrO’

Gye’eihllyj

(Mike)

AgrO

tvp

V
Z

(caus)

VPstem

t

j

V’

V
à 
Y a’ah
(dance)

This  model  accounts  for  the    linear  ordering  of  morphemes  in  SLQZ 
verbs in a manner consistent with both the LCA and the Mirror Principle. 
VP-raising accounts have also been suggested as a means of deriving the 
word  order  of  SOV  languages  such  as  Japanese  in  an  antisymmetric 
framework  (Nakajima 1996 and Pearson 1997), as well as the ordering of 
verb phrases in complex sentences in Hungarian (Koopman and Szabolcsi 
1998).  Like the account just proposed for SLQZ, these proposals assume 
that lexical material raises out of VP before VP-raising takes place. Naka-
jima’s account differs from the above in that it posits that the verbal head 
itself raises out of VP via head-movement, and the remnant VP contains 
the arguments, which remain in their theta-positions throughout the deriva-
tion.  These accounts  assume that the underlying tree structure for SOV 
languages is essentially identical to that of SVO languages, and the crucial 
difference between them is the choice of movement strategies used to de-
rive  the  surface  word  order.    Similar  assumptions  drive  this  analysis  of 
VSO word order in SLQZ . 

3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 

The  preceding  analysis  of  SLQZ  VP-raising  raises  the  larger  issue  
cally. 
of whether VP raising is responsible for VSO word order crosslinguisti 

 

90      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

There  is  strong evidence  that  this  may  be  the case, at least for some 
VSO languages.  In the following section, I show that the morphology and 
word  order  constraints  on  a  number  of  unrelated  VSO  languages  can  be 
accounted for by VP raising. Interested readers may refer to the previous 
analyses of the derivation of VSO word order in the previous chapters. 

3.4.1 VP-Raising and VSO: Crosslinguistic Evidence 
The  preceding  chapter  showed  that  previous  analyses  for  deriving  VSO 
word order fail to account for the word order possibilities of SLQZ. Now I 
address the question of whether the VP-raising proposal given for SLQZ 
can  account  for  VSO  word  order  and  verbal  morphology  in  other  lan-
guages. 

 There is strong evidence that it can. Many VSO languages unrelated to 
SLQZ pose similar syntactic and morphological problems for verbal head 
movement analyses. Just as SLQZ allows verbs and XPs to participate in-
terchangeably  in  a  number  of  syntactic  constructions,  VSO  languages  as 
genetically  distinct  as  Irish  (Carnie  1995)  and  Chamorro  (Chung  1998) 
likewise allow verbs and phrasal non-verbal predicates to participate in the 
same constructions: 

 
109.  Is [np ambráni [cp aL bhuailfidh an píobaire ti] 
        c         song         COMP play.fut the piper       
    
  

 

(é) “Yellow Submarine” 
 agr 
 
“Yellow  Submarine”  is  a  song  which  the  bagpiper  is  going  to  
play” 

Mom Q     not from the house God.Prog you 
“Mom, weren’t you (coming) from the church?” 
(Chamorro:  Chung 1998, p. 55) 

         (Irish: Carnie 1995, p.  194) 
 
110.  Nang, kao ti ginin i gima’ yúyu’us hao? 
 
 
 
 
In the Irish example, Carnie argues that the predicate “a song which the 
bagpiper is going to play” occupies a position normally occupied by a ver-
bal head. In the Chamorro example, the PP “from the church” is marked 
with progressive aspect (realized as reduplication of the primary stressed 
open syllable) in the same way as a verbal predicate would be. 

While  Chung  independently  concludes  that  both  verbal  and  non- 
verbal predicates in Chamorro should be treated as XPs, Carnie proposes 

3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 

91 

that phrasal predicates in Irish be treated as heads.8 I will discuss Carnie’s 
proposal in the appendix to this chapter. 

A  number  of  VSO  languages  also  show  verbal  morphology  patterns 
which, like those in SLQZ, cannot be accounted for by head movement. A 
common (though not universal) feature of VSO languages, for instance, is 
the presence of preverbal tense/aspect markers.  As previously argued for 
SLQZ,  this  ordering  cannot  be  derived  by  verbal  head-movement  if  the 
Mirror Principle and principles of antisymmetry are to be maintained, and 
if standardly held assumptions about the ordering of functional projections 
such as TP are to hold. Under standard head-movement accounts of verb-
movement, tense markers are incorporated into verbal heads when the verb 
raises into the head of a higher Tense projection. Head-movement models 
of  verb-movement account for the verbal morphology of languages such 
as 
English  and  French,  where  tense/aspect  morphemes  follow  the verb. 
How
ever, if morpheme ordering is necessarily a “mirror image” of syntactic 
hi
erarchy (and only left adjunction is possible), then the existence of prever-
bal  tense/aspect  markers  that  form  syntactic  units  with  verb  stems  is 
problematic:  if  head-movement  is  assumed,  then  either  the  verbal  head  
right-adjoins to the tense morpheme generated higher in the tree (violating 
antisymmetry)  or  the  tense  morpheme  itself  is  generated  lower  than  the 
verb, and itself raises and left-adjoins to the verb. This ordering of TP is 
unattested in the literature. 

Now I will address a few specific cases: A number of Eastern Polyne-
sian  languages  (e.g.,  Hawaiian  (Elbert  and  Pukui  1979),  Easter  Island 
(Chapin 1978)) show an ordering of morphological material on verbs par-
allel  to  that  of  SLQZ.  That  is,  the  verbal  stems  are  preceded  by 
tense/aspect  and  causative  markers,  and  followed  by  adverbial  markers, 
applicative markers, and agreement: 

111.  Ua   ‘a pono ‘ia                 keia pila 
perf  caus-proper-passive  this bill 
 
 
“This bill was approved”              
 (Hawaiian: Elbert and Pukui 1979) 

It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  inventory  of  verbal  morphemes 
available in these languages does not correspond exactly to that of SLQZ. 
What is crucial for the analysis to follow is the relative order of tense and 
causative marking on the verb stems: as argued earlier in this chapter, such 
ordering is impossible to derive under standard head-movement accounts 
of verb movement, if left adjunction is assumed to be the only option. 

                                                      
8 Chung, however, explicitly argues against the existence of a single underlying 

structure for all VSO languages. 

 

92      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

Chapin (1975) posits the following template for Easter Island inflected 

verbs: 

112.  Tense/aspect -Head -Adverb -ro  Prog. Deictic PVD 
 
where ro is an “individual marker” which “expresses the idea that the 
action referred to is one which was imposed on the subject, not  carried out 
voluntarily”, Prog. appears in progressive constructions, and PVD is one 
of four “postverbal demonstration” particles. (From the examples in Cha-
pin’s work, it appears that only the tense/aspect marker and head are man-
datory in all verbal constructions.) Easter Island, then, also shows a pat-
terning of verbal morphemes similar to that of SLQZ: tense/aspect marking 
to the left of the verbal stem, and adverbial suffixes/clitics to the right. As 
previously argued for SLQZ, such ordering cannot be derived under stan-
dard  head-movement  analyses  of  verb  movement,  if  the  standardly  ac-
cepted ordering of functional projections is to be maintained. 

Thus,  there  is  suggestive  morphological  evidence  that  other  VSO  lan-
guages may also employ VP-remnant movement as their verb-movement 
strategy.  In  the  next  sections,  I  will  show  syntactic  evidence  supporting 
this possibility. 
Polynesian Subject Clitics 
Further evidence for VP-raising  as a possible basis for VSO word order is 
the distribution of second-position clitics in Polynesian languages. In Sa-
moan  and  Tongan,  both  VSO  languages,  subjects  generally  follow  the 
verb, which is preceded by a tense/aspect marker: 

 
113.  na’e puke ia 
 
 

past  sick  she 
“She was sick”   
 (Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 83) 

 

 
114.  ‘olo’o tautala lemu ia ‘oe 
 
 

prog.  talk      soft  that you 
“You’re speaking softly”            
 (Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 86) 

 
Pronominal subjects, however, may appear as clitics between the tense 
marker  and  verb.  Cliticized  subjects  take  a  distinct  morphological  form 
from their non-cliticized counterparts, and form a phonological word with 
the tense marker: 

 
115.  na’e ne puke 
 
past she sick 
“She was sick”   
 
(Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 83)     

  

3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 

93 

116.  ‘olo’o  ‘e    tautala lemu 
prog.   you talk      soft    
 
 
“You’re speaking softly”   
(Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 86) 

 

Objects  and  oblique  arguments  may  not  appear  in   this  preverbal 

position: 

117.  na’e ui ia     ‘e   he tangata 
 
 

past call her erg the man 
“The man called her”   
   
(Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 85) 

 
118.  *na’e ne ui   ‘e he tangata 
past  her call erg the man 
 
 
“The man called her”  
 
(Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 84) 

 
119.  sa tausi latou e le teine 
 
 

past care them erg the girl 
“The girl took care of them”  
(Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 88) 

 
120.  *sa latou tausi e le teine 
past they care erg the girl 
 
“The girl took care of them”  
 
(Samoan: Chung 1976, p.88) 

 

 

Further  constraints  on  subject  cliticization  vary  between  the  two  lan-
guages.  In Samoan, non-emphatic  pronominal subjects are obligatorily 
cli
ticized.  Emphatic subjects may not appear as preverbal clitics.  Subject 
cli
ticization  of  third-person  singular  subjects  of intransitive verbs is also 
disallowed: 

 
121.  ‘olo’o tautala lemu ‘oia 
prog   talk     soft   she 
 
 
“She’s speaking softly”   
(Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 89) 

 
122.  * ‘olo’o  ia tautala lemu 
 
 

  prog    she talk soft 
“She’s speaking softly”   
(Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 89) 

In  Tongan,  on  the  other  hand,  cliticization  of  pronominal  subjects  is 
obligatory  except  for  third-person  singular  pronominal  subjects,  which 
may cliticize optionally. (The constraints on third-person singular subjects 

 

94      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

are intriguing, but beyond the scope of the present work. I will leave them 
aside for future investigation.) 

While  Samoan  disallows  cliticization  of  emphatic  subject  pronouns, 
Tongan does allow pronominal subjects with emphatic or contrastive read-
ings. In these cases, however, pronoun doubling occurs: a second pronoun 
(in full, non-clitic form) appears postverbally: 

 
123.  na’a ma      ‘ave ‘e kimaua ho’o telefone 
 
 

past we=du take erg we=du your telephone 
“WE took away your telephone”              
 (Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 83) 

 
These data suggest that VP-raising can be posited for Tongan and Sa-
moan as well. While cliticization of this type is generally viewed as raising 
of  the  cliticized  pronoun,  I  propose  that  the  cliticized,  non-case-marked 
subject  clitics are in fact in situ pronominal subjects inside VPs raised to 
TP. The following tree reflects the proposed structure for the Tongan ex-
ample in (115), na’e ne puke, “She was sick” (functional projections for 
aspect, mood, etc. omitted for clarity). Here I assume that in Tongan, as in 
SLQZ,  fronted VPs are dominated by VPasp, which contains the preverbal 
tense/aspect marker: 

 
124. 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

TP

VPstem

V’

T’

T

AgrSP

AgrS’

AgrSP AgrOP

VPasp

V’

 
V
na’e
(pst)

DP
ne
(she)

AgrO’

 

V
puke
(sick)

 
 
 
 
Postverbal pronominal subjects are those raised to Spec, AgrSP. The VP 
complex  containing  the  Tense  marker  in  the  higher  shell  and  the  verbal 
root in the lower VP shell raises to TP, as in SLQZ: 

3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 

95 

125. 
 
 

 

TP

 
 

 

 

VPasp

 

V’

V
na’e
(pst)

VPstem

ti

V’

T’

T

AgrSP

DP
nei
(she)

AgrS’

AgrS AgrOP

 

AgrO’

 

V
puke
(sick)

 
 
 
This structure may  account for the different morphological forms of cli-
ticized and non-cliticized pronouns: one possibility is that the case markers 
on  full,  postverbal  pronominal  subjects  are  determiners  whose  features 
need to be checked by movement to Agr, thus forcing their extraction from 
VP. 

Additional support for VP-raising comes from the distribution of defi-
nite  and  indefinite  objects  in  Tongan.  Definite  objects  in  Tongan  follow 
lexical subjects: 

 
126.  Na’e kai  ‘e Sione e maá 
 
 

past eat   def John def bread 
“John ate the bread” 
(Shumway 1988, p. 188) 

             

 
Tongan  has  a  number  of  verbal  constructions,  however,  in  which  the 
verb and indefinite object together are treated as a single lexical unit. One 
such expression is kai maá  “eat bread”. When an indefinite object is used 
in such a  construction, it precedes, rather than follows, a lexical subject: 

 
127.  Na’e kai maá ‘e Sione 
past  eat bread def John 
 
 
“John ate bread”                        
(Shumway 1988, p. 188) 

 
In  this example,  the  indefinite  object  appears  to have  undergone
 movement  along  with  the  verb  to  pre-subject  position. Assuming  Kayne’s
  requirement that heads only adjoin to the left of other heads, the object could 
not have joined to the verb via incorporation.  

The   contrast   in  word  order  between  (126)  and  (127)  can  be  easily 
accounted  for  under  a  VP-raising  analysis.  When   objects  are  definite, 

 

96      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

raise  out  of  VP  to  AgrO.  The VP  (containing  the  tense  morpheme 

they 
and  traces of the raised object and subject) raises to spec, TP: 

 
 
 
When objects are indefinite, they remain inside VP. The subject raises 

V
tv

out to spec, AgrSP, and the VP raises to spec, TP: 

    

TP

VPasp

V’

V
na’e
(pst)

VPcaus

ti

V’

T’

T

AgrSP

DP
‘ Sionei
e
(John)

AgrS’

AgrS AgrOP

VPstem

AgrO’

DP
á 
e ma j

(the bread)

V
Kai
(eat)

tj

V’

      
TP

VPasp

V’

T’

T

AgrSP

V
na’e
(pst)

VPcaus

ti

V’

AgrS’

DP
‘e Sionei
(John)

AgrS AgrOP

AgrO’

VPstem

V
Kai
(eat)

á 
ma
(bread)

V’

V
tv

 
128.   

 
129.   

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
The  placement  of  indefinite  objects  inside  VP  is  also  consistent  with 
Diesing’s (1992) proposal that indefinite arguments take scope inside VP, 
while definite arguments raise out of VP to receive definite interpretations. 

3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 

97 

Furthermore, head-movement accounts of the cliticization process fail to 
produce all and only the allowable constructions. I will now consider the 
possible  verbal  head-raising  scenarios  that  could  potentially  generate  the 
allowable word orders. 

In all of these scenarios, I assume that the tense marker is generated
 in the head of T. Subjects are generated VP-internally. Thus, a possible 
un

derlying structure for (116) would be as follows: 
130. 
 

TP

 

T
na’e
(past)

         

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

T’

AgrSP

AgrS’

AgrS AgrOP

AgrO’

AgrO

VP

DP

V

’

ne
(she) V
puke
(sick)

In order for the tense marker to precede the verb at spell-out, it must be 
assumed  that  the  verb  does  not  raise  to  and  incorporate  into  T  until  LF. 
Thus, Tense features in Tongan are weak: they do not require the verb that 
receives these features to move in the overt syntax.  

If this is the case, then the cliticized subject constructions can be easily 
derived:  the  verb  remains  in  situ  at  spell-out,  and  the  subject  pronoun 
raises to spec, AgrSP or remains in situ itself in spec, VP.  

This raises the question, however, of how to derive sentences with lexi-

cal subjects, which appear postverbally: 

’

131.  Na’e kai   e Sione e maá 
 
 

past eat   def John def bread 
“John ate the bread”                               
(Shumway 1988, p. 188) 

 
Here,  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  verb  raises  to  a  position  above  the  
subject, but below the tense marker in TP. One possibility is that it under-
goes  “partial  movement”  to  the  head  of  AgrSP,  leaving  the  subject 
stranded in spec VP. Such movement, however, seems unmotivated: why 

 

98      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

would the verb be required to raise in these cases? Since Tongan verbs ap-
pear without overt person/number inflection, it appears that these features 
are weak, and thus do not need to be checked by overt movement. Also, if 
it is possible for such normally weak features to be satisfied early by overt 
movement  (in  clear  violation  of  Last  Resort)  what  blocks  the  verb  from 
undergoing further movement to TP at spell-out?  

The above data show that for Tongan and Samoan, VP-remnant move-
ment accounts for  possible word order alternations, while head-movement 
of the verb fails to do so.  
Berber Second-Position Object Clitics   
Further evidence for the phrasal status of verbs in VSO languages comes 
from  the  distribution  of  second-position  object  clitics  in  Berber,  an 
Afroasiatic language. As with the SLQZ second-position adverbial clitics 
discussed in Section 1.1, the Berber clitics may cliticize both to verbs and 
clearly  phrasal  constituents.  Lee  and  Ouhalla  (1998)  note  that    a  unified 
account for the second-position clitic construction is only possible if verbs 
are assumed to undergo the same type of movement as the other XPs. Ob-
ject and directionality clitics in Berber appear in the second position in a 
sentence, after wh-words, focused XPs, clausal negation, or clause-initial 
verbs:9 

wh-XP (CL) V (*CL) 
foc-XP (CL) V (*CL) 
neg (CL) V (*CL) 

132.  (*CL) V (CL) 
 
 
 
133.  Min as        y-usha ufrux? 
what to-her 3MS-gave boy 
 
 
“What did the boy give her?” 
 
134.  Tafirast ay as y-usha ufrux 
 
 
 
135.  Ur as y-usha ufrux tafirast 
 
 
136.  Y-ush as ufrux tafirast 
 
 
 

pear      FM to-her 3MS-gave boy 
“It’s the pear that the boy gave her” 

neg to-her 3MS-gave boy pear 
“The boy didn’t give her the pear” 

3MS-gave to-her boy pear 
“The boy gave her the pear” 

                                                      
9  These clitics, however, may not directly follow left-dislocated subjects, which 

are interpreted  as topics. 

3.5 Conclusion  

99 

If it is indeed the case that these examples all exemplify the same con-
struction,   the  fact  that  verbs  may  precede  object/directionality   clitics 
appears  problematic.  Apart  from  the  verbal  cases  such  as  (136) , the other 
constituents that trigger clitic-second form a natural class: wh-words, fo-
cused constituents, and clausal negation can be analyzed as XPs containing 
operators. These constituents are assumed to occupy high (pre-AgrSP/TP) 
positions in the tree. 

If  pre-clitic  verbs  in  constructions  such  as  (136)  are  assumed  to  be 
heads, then it must also be assumed that clitic-second in these cases is a 
derived differently than in the other cases.  Ideally, however,  any account 
of pre-clitic verbs must be consistent with other contexts in which second-
position clitics are allowed.   

Thus,    the  only  solution  that  allows  all  clitic-second  constructions  in 
Berber to be treated as uniform derivations is to assume that clause-initial 
verbs in clitic constructions such as (136) are remnant VPs in the spec of 
CP/FocP. (In the presence of other constituents in CP/FocP, VP remains in 
TP.) This allows the clitic to be analysed as occupying the same position in 
all  contexts,  and  allows  verb-initial  clitic  constructions  to  be  structurally 
unified with XP-initial clitic constructions.  

3.5 Conclusion 

In this chapter, I showed both morphological and syntactic evidence that 
verbs  in  SLQZ  should  be  construed  as  remnant  VPs,  rather  than  verbal 
heads. This evidence included the ordering of verbal morphemes, and the 
phrase-like behavior of verbs in certain syntactic constructions. I showed 
that while there is no principled way to derive the morphological ordering 
of  SLQZ verbs via head movement,  a remnant VP-raising strategy can
 account for  both  the  morpheme ordering and syntactic distribution of 
SLQZ 

verbs in a principled way. 

I also showed crosslinguistic evidence that VP-remnant raising accounts 
for VSO word order in a number of unrelated languages, as well as some 
of  the  typological  features  often  associated  with  verb-initial  languages 
(such  as  preverbal  tense/aspect  markers  and  predicates  with  phrase-like 
syntax).  

 

100      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

3.6 Appendix  to Chapter  3:  Considering Head 

Movement of XPs  

3.6.1 The Phrasal Head-Movement Proposal: Carnie 

1995 

An  alternate    approach  to  the  problem  of  syntactically  interchangeable 
verbs and phrasal categories is proposed by Carnie (1995). He notes cases 
in  Modern  Irish  (also  a  VSO  language)  in  which  nominal  and  adjectival 
predicates, which can contain entire phrasal categories and should thus be 
assumed to be XPs, undergo what appears to be head-movement. He pro-
poses  (following  Chomsky  1995)  that  the  X/XP  distinction  is  an  archaic 
artifact of X’ theory and that it is possible, in effect, for phrasal categories 
to  be  treated  as  heads  and  thus  undergo  head  movement.  (Stowell  1981 
likewise suggests the possibility of phrasal constituents incorporating into 
verbal heads.) Carnie also shows evidence from other languages suggest-
ing  that  large  constituents  crosslinguistically  may  also  undergo  similar 
processes. He gives several examples from a range of languages (including 
Persian, Yoruba, and Yiddish) in which large, apparently phrasal constitu-
ents undergo movement considered to be limited to heads or take affixes  
normally subcategorized by heads. 

One piece of evidence that Carnie presents for analyzing complex predi-
cates as heads comes from wh-extraction constraints in Irish. No material 
may be extracted from inside a non-referential predicate nominal (such as 
(137)) by wh-movement  (138): 

137.  Is [np ambráni [cp aL bhuailfidh an píobaire ti]  
 
 
 

c         song         COMP play.fut the piper 
“Yellow Submarine” is a song which the bagpiper 

(é) “Yellow Submarine” 
agr 
is going to play
(Carnie 1995, p.  194) 

”

  
 

  
  

 

        
138.   *Cén píobairej arb [np ambráni [cp aL bhuailfeadh séj  ti]  
 
 
 

which piper  rel          
song         COMP play.cond he 
“Which bagpiper is “Yellow Submarine” a song which 

(é) “Yellow Submarine” 
agr 
he/ti is going to play?” 
(Carnie 1995, p.  194) 

3.6 Appendix to  hapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs 

C

101 

Carnie argues that the nominal status of the predicate should not be con-
sided the cause of the ban on extraction, since wh-extraction may occur out 
of other nominal phrases in Irish: 

 
139.  Tá máthair an fhir san otherlann 
 
 

be.pres mother the man.gen in.the hospital 
“The man's mother is in the hospital” 
(Carnie 1995, p. 193) 

 
140.  Cé aN  bhuil ai máthair san otherlann 
 
 

who COMP be.pres. his mother in.the hospital 
“Who is (his) mother in the hospital?” 
(Carnie 1995, p. 193) 

 

 

 
Thus,  Carnie argues, the only explanation for the ban on extraction out 
of the complex nominal predicate in (138) is that  has been reanalyzed as a 
word (head), and thus can no longer be broken up by extraction. 

3.6.2  Against Complex Head-Movement 
Carnie’s data and analysis are provocative. Like SLQZ, Irish has a number 
of  constructions  in  which  non-head  constituents  and  heads  can  undergo 
identical syntactic processes.  Carnie proposes that rather than positing 
pu
tative  “heads”  as  XPs,   the  constituents  that  appear  to  be  XPs  should
  be treated as heads. This raises an obvious question: can this strategy work 
for  SLQZ as well?  

A strictly theory-internal reason against complex head-movement is that 
it  raises  problems  for  Kayne s  antisymmetry  constraints.   If  a  large  non-
head dominating a number of terminals itself (such as a complex nominal 
predicate)  raised into a head, a structure such as the following would
 re

,

sult: 
 

 

102      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

141. 

ZP

 
 

 
 

Z’

Z

YP

XP

Z

Y’

QP

X’

Y

X

WP

 
 
In  this  structure,  XP  would  be  the  complex  predicate  that  “head-
moves” into the head of Z (the exact nature of these categories being irrele-
vant here). This results in a non-head (XP) being adjoined to a head (Z), 
which, as seen earlier, forms an illicit structure. The complement of XP, 
WP,  linearly  precedes  YP,  but  cannot  c-command  it  (by  Kayne s  defini-
tion) because it is dominated by XP and YP is not. The structure is thus not 
fully antisymmetric, and thus illicit. 

,

Furthermore, there may be independent reasons why the Irish contrasts 
in (1-4) occur. Consider again the data in  (1-4): these examples intend to 
show that while Irish allows wh-extraction from complex nominals, it does 
not allow wh-extraction from nominal predicates. Carnie proposes that the 
island status of complex predicate nominals stems from their status as syn-
tactic heads. 

A possible explanation for this constraint could be the position in which 
nominal  predicates  appear.  In  SLQZ  and  a  number  of  other  languages 
(such as Hausa), nominal and adjectival predicates occupy the same slot as 
focused  constituents  (in  SLQZ,    the  immediately  preverbal  position,  as 
seen in (142)). This position, when filled (143), blocks wh-movement: 

 
142.  Mee s n-àa Gye eihlly 
teacher neut-be Mike 
 
“Mike is a teacher” 
 
 
143.  *Tu mee s n-àa? 
 
 
 
In order for wh-movement past a predicate nominal to occur in SLQZ, 
the predicate nominal must appear in postverbal position rather than in its 
normal preverbal position: 

who teacher neut-be 
“Who is a teacher?” 

’

’

’

 

3.6 Appendix to  hapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs 

C

 

103 

’

who neut-be teacher 
“Who is a teacher?” 

144.  Tu n-àa mee s? 
 
 
This suggests that preverbal nominal predicates in SLQZ either occupy 
the same position as wh-words or a position that blocks wh-movement for 
independent reasons. (A more detailed account of the interaction between 
wh-movement and focus is presented in Chapters 4 and 5.) 

If predicate nominals occupy a similar position in Irish, then the ban on 
extraction out of complex predicates could be the result of the actual posi-
tion of the predicate itself, not its lack of internal structure. 

Another possibility is that different types of nominal expressions in Irish 
simply have different constraints on extraction.  In English, for instance, 
wh-extraction out of relative clauses is clearly disallowed (145), while wh-
extraction out of possessive constructions is allowed in certain registers, as 
noted by Kayne 1993 (146): 

,

145.  *Who do you think the man that hit t sued? 
 
146.   Who do you think t  s mother is in the hospital? 
It is plausible that similar constraints may hold in Irish. 
,
There  are  also  language-specific  reasons  against  extending  Carnie s 
analysis to SLQZ, and thus treating all SLQZ predicates  as heads.  While 
both  Irish  and SLQZ have  syntactic constructions in which phrases and 
heads apparently appear interchangeably, these constructions differ across 
the two languages. In Irish, the problem cases appear to be limited to those 
in which phrasal categories (complex nominal predicates) appear in posi-
tions  normally  associated  with  heads:  specifically,  these  predicates  may 
appear in positions normally reserved for verbal heads. In SLQZ, problem-
atic  cases  include  those  in  which  apparent  heads  (verbs)  appear  in 
tions  normally associated with XPs (such  as the constituent negation 
posi
struction  and adverbial clitic constructions described in Section 3.2.1). 
con
If 
we assume that verbs in SLQZ are indeed heads, and that heads thus may 
undergo  the  same  type  of  constituent  negation  as  nominals  and  preposi-
tional phrases, then we would have to assume that  nominal arguments and 
PPs are likewise treated as heads in the syntax.  

 

3.6.3  XP-Raising Analyses for Irish 
I have made a number of arguments why complex predicates should not be 
treated as heads in SLQZ. But is it still a workable option for languages 
such as Irish? 

Other  recent  work  on  Irish  supports  the  possibility  of  the  VP-raising 
analysis  argued  for  here.  Other  researchers  have  independently  proposed 

 

104      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

“

XP-raising analyses of Irish (Duffield 1993, 1995; Noonan 1999). Duffield 
notes that the possibility of apparently  right adjoined  adverbial phrases 
and  light  pronouns  is  highly  inconsistent  with  the  otherwise  completely 
head-initial syntax of Irish, and proposes that  adverbials phrases and pro-
nouns  end  up  at  the  right  edge  of  sentences  because  they  are  generated 
high (adjoined to TP) and the remainder of the sentence (the TP containing 
the verb, subject, and object) raises past it. Thus, sentence-final adverbs in 
Irish sentences such as that in (147) result from the movement process in 
(148): 

” 

saw       Mary the man in-the street in Derry yesterday 
“
Mary saw the man in the street in Derry yesterday  
” 
(Duffield 1994: p. 221) 

147.  Chonaic Máire an fear sa     tsráid   i   nDoire inné 
 
 
 
  
148.  
 

WP

TP

W’

á 
Chonaic M ire…
 
saw Mary…

W

TP

t

AdvP
inn
yesterday

é 

 
 Noonan s (1999) analysis of the Irish particles aL and aN  also points to 
a VP-raising analysis. AL, which appears between fronted wh-words and 
verbs when subjects or objects are wh-moved, and aN, which appears be-
tween verbs and fronted PPs or adverb phrases, have been previously ana-
lysed as   agreeing complementizers  (McCloskey 1979, cited in Noonan 
1999). Their presence was argued to be direct evidence for successive cy-
clic wh-movement: 

” 

,

“

which children aL believes   Sean aL play-COND     here 
” 
“
Which children does Sean believe would play here?  

 
149.  Cén    páistí      a chreideann Seán a   d'imheodh ___anseo? 
 
 
 
150.  Céard leis     a    ndearna tú é? 
what with-3s aN did      you it 
 
“
With what did you do it?  ” 
 

3.6 Appendix to  hapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs 

C

105 

The particle aL also appears before fronted objects in infinitival clauses:  
 
151.  Ba mhaith liom [Seán an caora   a   mheá ar an bhfeirm] 
 
 
In  this  context,  aL  has  been  analysed  as  a  reflex  of  specifier-head 
agreement between the object DP and verb (Duffield 1995, Noonan 1994, 
cited in Noonan 1999). 

I would like       Sean the sheep aL weigh on the farm 
“I would like Sean to weigh the sheep on the farm” 

When  a  PP  or  adverbial  phrase  raises  through  more  than  one  clause, 
however, aN appears only in the lowest clause. The particle aL  appears in 
front of all higher clauses the wh-adjunct raises through: 

who (aL) think M. aL believes    Sean aN spoke Nic with-agr 
“
” 
Who does Mary think that John believes that Nic spoke with?  
 

 
152.  Cé shíleann Máire   a chreideann Seán ar labhair Nic leis 
 
 
 
Noonan points out that the appearance of both aL and aN  in these cases 
cannot be accounted for by the argument that aL represents agreement with 
wh-moved  arguments,  while aN    agrees  with  wh-moved  adjuncts:  if  this 
were  the  case,  then  aN  should  appear  in  every  clause  the  adjunct  wh-
expression raises through. 

She argues instead that aL  in multiclausal wh-questions is not a reflex 
of  successive-cyclic  wh-movement,  but  of  VP/CP  fronting.  When  a 
word raises out of an embedded CP, the CP itself raises to the front of 
wh
next CP up.  This  movement is exemplified in the derivation for the 
the 
follow

ing example: 

what aL believes Sean     pro aL  would-say-2s 
“What does Sean believe you would say?” 

 
153.  Céard a chreideann Seán [pro a dhéanfá__]? 
 
 
 
The base-generated structure appears as follows: 
 
154.  [chreideann Seán [pro dhéanfá céard]] 
         believes      Sean  pro would-say what 
 
Wh-movement of the object triggers the appearance of aL in the lower 

clause: 

 
155.   [chreideann Seán [céard pro a dhéanfá t]] 
          believes    Sean    what pro aL would-say 
 
The embedded CP itself fronts to the left of the matrix clause, thus trig-

gering the appearance of aL before the matrix verb: 

 

106      3  The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:  Arguments for VP Raising 

 
156.  [céard pro a dhéanfá t]  [ a chreideann Seán tCP] 
         what pro aL would-say   aL believes Sean 
 
The matrix remnant VP then fronts itself: 
 
157.  [ a chreideann Seán tCP] [céard pro a dhéanfá t] 
          aL believes Sean            what pro aL would-say 
 
Finally, the wh-word raises to the leftmost spec, CP: 
 
158.  Céard [ a chreideann Seán tCP] [twh pro a dhéanfá twh] 
        what     aL believes  Sean                pro aL would-say 
 
Thus,  the  functions  of  aL  in  wh-constructions  and  in  object-fronting 
constructions can be unified: in both cases, aL represents agreement trig-
gered by fronting of a complement, either clausal or nominal. This also ac-
counts  for  the  distribution  of  aL  and  aN  in  embedded  adjunct  wh-
questions:  since aL  reflects only fronting of arguments and clausal com-
plements, wh- extraction of non-arguments does not trigger the appearance 
of aL in the clause from which extraction takes place. 

If Duffield's and Noonan's accounts are correct, then the ability of ver-
bal and phrasal predicates to appear interchangeably in certain Irish con-
structions is amenable to the same solution as that proposed for SLQZ: the 
verbal form that undergoes movement is a VP remnant rather than a verbal 
head, and verbal movement is XP movement. 

 
 
 

 

4  Further  Consequences of VP-Remnant 

Movement: Some Common Negation   
Structures in SLQZ 

4.1 Overview of Three Basic SLQZ Negation 

Constructions 

SLQZ  has  a  rich    inventory  of  negative  constructions.  In  the  previous 
chapter,  some  of  these  were  used  as  evidence  for  remnant  movement  of 
VP, rather than head-movement of V, in SLQZ grammar. This chapter will 
provide explicit syntactic accounts for three of the most common negation 
structures in SLQZ: clausal negation  with the negative marker cë’ity (1), 
focus/constituent negation with the  negative marker a’ti’ (2), and indefi-
nite/existential negation with the negative marker tèe’bag (3): 

 
Clausal Negation: 
1.  Cë’ity   ny-àa’z-dya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
neg     subj-beat-dya’ Mike      Felipe 
 
 
“Mike didn’t hit Felipe” 
 
Constituent Negation: 
2.  A’ti’ Sann Luu’c-dya’ gw-eh Pa’amm 
         neg San Lucas-dya’ perf-go Pam 
         Pam didn’t go to SAN LUCAS (but rather somewhere else)” 
 
Indefinite/Existential Negation: 
3.   Tèe’bag calìi   ch-o’o-dy-ënn izhih 
 
 
 
This  chapter  will  show  how  VP-raising  provides  semantic,  as  well  as 
syntactic, motivation for some of the structures discussed. Examination of 
these negative constructions will also afford an opportunity to refine and 
elaborate upon the tentative hierarchy of functional projections posited in 
the last chapter, and will provide evidence for some antisymmetry-driven 
constraints on movement.  
 
 

no        where irr-go-dya’-1p   tomorrow 
“We won’t go anywhere tomorrow” 

 

108   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

At first glance, these three negative constructions look quite similar, as 
can  be  seen  in  the  preceding  examples.  In  all  cases,  negation  is  clause-
initial,  and  negated  constituents  appear  between  two  markers  indicating 
negation.  On closer examination, however, these  patterns prove to differ 
syntactically in interesting ways. These differences reveal much about the 
inventory of functional projections and their order in SLQZ. 

I will begin my discussion of negation with a brief account of the syn-
tactic and semantic features of the clitic -dya’, which appears after negated 
constituents in all three of the negation constructions under discussion. I 
will  then  examine  and  propose  analyses  for  clausal  negation,  constituent 
negation, and finally, existential negation. 

4.2  What Does -dya’ Do? 

In all three of the negative constructions shown above, negated constitu-
ents  are  followed  by  the  clitic  -dya’  (or  its  variant,  -di’).  Because  its  
semantic features are complex and not limited to negation, I will leave it 
unglossed. 

Dya’, which appears (nearly) obligatorily in all three negative construc-
tions, also appears in other, non-negative constructions. It may appear as a 
clitic on focus-fronted constituents to mark them as occupying a low point 
on some contextually determined scale:  

 
4.  X:-bu’uhdy-dya’    Li’eb w-laàa’n  Gye’eihlly 
 
 

poss-chicken-dya’ Felipe perf-steal Mike 
“All Mike stole was Felipe’s chicken  
(and not anything better)” 

 
5.  Nnyi’ihs-dya’ b-dèèi’dy   Gye’eihlly gw-èe’eh   Li’eb 
 
water-dya’    perf-give       Mike        perf-drink Felipe 
“All Mike gave Felipe to drink was water (even though there was 
lots of other stuff)” 

 
It  also  appears  on  clause-initial  constituents  to  mark  degree  or  extent  

(P. Munro, p.c.): 

Terseer-di’ gu-allda-a’ 
third-dya’ perf-arr-1s 
“I went as far as third grade”  (ML 1997) 

 
6. 
 
 
 
7.  Cali-dya’ r-uhny Li’eb zèèi’ny? 
where-dya hab-do Felipe work 
 
 
“How far away does Felipe work?” 
 

 

 

4.2 What Does dya’ Do? 

-

109 

It may also appear on non-negated verbs. In these contexts, it appears to 

highlight points in time to indicate suddenness of an event: 
8.  Ca-yìi’ah-dya’ Gye’eihlly nnahx     chih  b-iahb   
prog-drink-dya’ Mike   chocolate when perf-fall 
 
“Mike was drinking chocolate when 
  
ba’gêëizh loh-ih 
 fly        in-3s.dist 
a fly fell into it”     

     
     
 
9.   Cay-auw-dya’ Gye’eihlly gueht  
 perf-eat-dya’     Mike     tortilla  
    
 
“Mike was eating (tortillas) 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, while -dya’ appears to contribute little meaning of its own when 
under the scope of negation, it does make a semantic contribution when it 
appears outside the scope of negation. 

chih   b-cuhni’ih   Li’eb   zh:àa’n-ih 
when perf-kick     Felipe rear-3s.dist 
when Felipe kicked his butt” 

-Dya’ appears to be semantically and syntactically reminiscent of  Eng-
lish  any:  like  -dya’, any may appear both under the scope of negation 
(where it has traditionally been called “negative polarity any”  and in non-
negative  contexts  (the  so-called  “free-choice”  use  of  any).  The  differing 
uses and interpretations of any   in these contexts show some parallels to 
those of negative and non-negative -dya’ in SLQZ.  

Under the scope of negation, any  contributes no truth-functional value 

to expressions in which it appears:  

10.  Mike didn’t eat (any) grasshoppers 
 
It  can,  however,  add  a  slightly  more  emphatic  feel  to  the  sentence:  in  
the preceding example, it could potentially express the idea that it was not 
only the case that Mike failed to eat grasshoppers, he was unwilling to eat 
them or consider eating them. 

SLQZ -dya’ makes no such contributions to the semantics of negative 
sentences. In SLQZ, there are contexts (which will be accounted for in the 
sections to follow) in which  -dya’ may be omitted in negative construc-
tions. Such constructions suggest that -dya’ under negation, like negative-
polarity  any,    contributes  little  semantically  to  the  structures  in  which  it 
appears. Compare (11), without -dya’, to (12), a standard clausal negation 
structure with -dya’: 

 
11.  Gye’eihlly cë’ity  n-àa       me’s 
 Mike      neg    neut-be  teacher 
      
     
“MIKE is not a teacher” 

 

110   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

12.  Cë’ity  n-àa -dya’ Gye’eihlly me’s 
neg    neut-be-dya’ Mike     teacher 
 
 
“Mike is not a teacher”  
 
The  absence  of  dya’  in  (11)  is  syntactically  motivated  by  movement 
constraints triggered by focus-fronting of the subject Gye’eihlly, “Mike”; 
this and other constraints on the distribution of -dya’ will be discussed in 
detail in Section 4.3.2. 

Outside the scope of negation, however, any  receives possible readings 
similar  to  some  of  those  available  to  non-negative-dya’:    As  argued  by  
Kadmon and Landman (1990), any serves to denote an (extreme) point on 
a contextually fixed scale: 

 
13.  Any match that you strike will light 
14.  Anyone can finish this puzzle in five minutes 
 
In  (13),  use  of    any  match  suggests  that  even  defective  or  unusual 
matches might work in the context introduced by the sentence; in (14), use 
of anyone implies that even those normally assumed to be unable to finish 
puzzles (such as unusually slow people or small children) would be able to 
complete the puzzle under discussion. In short, Kadmon and Landman ar-
gue,  any , in  both  negative-polarity  and  non-negative  contexts,  serves  to 
expand the range of contextually acceptable objects that can be introduced 
into the discourse. This would account for the interpretation of any in both 
non-negative contexts such as (13-14) and the emphatic negative flavor of 
any  under  negation  in  examples  such  as  (10).  The  interpretation  of  
non-negative any in English appears quite similar to the contribution made 
by -dya’ in non-negative contexts such as (4-5).  

While negative-polarity any  can add emphatic readings to contexts in 
which it appears, -dya’ under the scope of negation, as previously noted, 
does  not.  The  lack  of  any  semantic  contribution  by  -dya’  to  negative  
expressions,  along  with  fact  that  -dya’  is  obligatory  in  most  negative  
contexts,  suggests that it has been reanalyzed from an optional negative 
polarity item expressing emphatic negation (like negative polarity any)  to 
an obligatory function word necessary for the syntactic realization of nega-
tive structures. I will thus argue that while it seems probable that -dya’ in 
SLQZ may have been derived from an indefinite quantifier much like Eng-
lish any,  its quantificational force has been bleached in negative contexts. 
In the following sections, I will discuss how this is realized in the syntax. 
 
 

 

 

4.3 Clausal Negation 

111 

4.3 Clausal Negation 

Clausal  negation  in  SLQZ  is  expressed  with  two  morphemes:  cë’ity,  
which precedes the verb, and -dya’, which immediately follows the verb 
and precedes the subject: 

 
15.  Cë’ity   ny-àa’z-dya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb 
neg     subj-beat-dya’ Mike       Felipe 
 
 
“Mike didn’t hit Felipe” 
 
Two-part negation structures are common crosslinguistically, and have 
been  generally  assumed  to  result  from  spec-head  agreement  of  negative 
morphemes  in  NegP.  Thus,  there  are  two  possible  structures  for  SLQZ 
clausal  negation:  either    the  preverbal  negative  morpheme  cë’ity    is    the 
head of NegP and the postverbal clitic -dya’ is the specifier (as has been 
suggested for the preverbal negative morpheme ne  and postverbal nega-
tive morpheme pas   in French clausal negation (Moritz and Valois 1992), 
or preverbal cë’ity  is the specifier of NegP and postverbal -dya’  the head 
(as  suggested  for  the  preverbal  and  postverbal  negative  particles  in  the 
Grassfields Bantu language Nweh by Nkemnji 1995).  

4.3.1 Reasons Why  cë’ity Is a Specifier, -dya’ a Head: Evidence 

from -zhya’ Cliticization 

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  SLQZ,  the  preverbal  negative  marker 
cë’ity is in the specifier of NegP, while -dya’ is the head, parallel to the ac-
count proposed for Nweh by Nkemnji 1995. 

This evidence comes from the distribution of the modal clitic-zhya’  in 
clausal  negation  structures.  Recall  from  the  previous  chapter  that  -zhya’ 
cliticization was used as a diagnostic for XP status. The fact  that  -zhya’ 
may  cliticize  to  verbs,  as  well  as  to  DPs  and  PPs,  was  argued  to  be  a  
diagnostic for the XP status of SLQZ verbs: 

  

 neut-exist-might-3p.prox Los Angeles                     
“They might be in Los Angeles”                       

 
16.   N-u’-zhya’-rëng               Lohs Aa’nngl   
     
     
 
17.   Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’-rëng 
  
 
 
18.  Laa’iny yu’uh-zhya’ n-u’uh li’ebr 
 
 
 

in         house-might neut-exist book 
“The book might be in the house” 

Los Angeles-might    neut-exist-3p.prox 
“Los Angeles might be where they are (not somewhere else)” 

 

112   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

Thus,  I  will  continue  to  assume  that  the  ability  of  a  constituent  to  

participate in -zhya’-cliticization indicates its XP status. 

In clausal negation structures,  -zhya’ can cliticize to cë’ity . This sug-
gests that  cë’ity  is an XP as well. Compare a simple example of clausal 
negation (19), a non-negated sentence where -zhya’ cliticizes onto the verb 
(20), and a clausal negation structure with -zhya’ (21): 

 
19.  Cë’ity       n-gya’a-dya’ Gye’eihlly 
 

neg          subj-dance-dya’ Mike  

       “Mike didn’t dance” 

perf-dance-might Mike 
“Mike might have danced”1 

 
20.  B-gya’a’-zhya’ Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
21.  Cë’ity-zhya’ n-gya’a-dya’ Gye’eihlly 
 

neg-might    subj-dance-dya’ Mike 

        “Mike might not have danced” 

 

 

 
The  modal  clitic  -zhya’  cannot  cliticize  to  -dya’    in    clausal  negation 

constructions. This suggests that -dya’  is not an XP: 

 

neg   subj-dance-dya’-might   Mike 
“Mike might not have danced” 

 
22.  *Cë’ity n-gya’a-dya’-zhya’ Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
By extension, this suggests that the cë’ity-verb-dya’ complex does not 
form  a  movable  XP  constituent,  even  if  cë’ity  and  -dya’  are  required  to  
appear in spec-head agreement with each other at some point in the deriva-
tion.  Independent  evidence  for  this  will  be  shown  in  the  following  
sections. 

Under  the  assumption  that  verbs  in  SLQZ  are  actually  VP  remnants 
rather than heads, and negation is realized by movement into NegP,  ne-
gated verbs must raise into NegP via XP-movement. Thus, they  raise into 
the specifier of NegP. Under the assumption that two-part negation results 
from spec-head agreement, this would place -dya’  in the head of NegP. 

 I  will  assume  that  cë’ity  is  base-generated  in  a  quantifier  phrase  that 
takes  scope  over  VP.  The  QP  containing  the  VP  raises  into  Spec,  NegP 
thus falling into specifier-head agreement with -dya’,  as seen in (23)2: 

 

                                                      
1 As described in Chapter 1, the Subjunctive aspect rarely appears in non-negated 

matrix clauses, but is used in place of Perfective aspect in negated sentences. 

2  This  structure  raises  the  issue  of  how  -zhya’  cliticization  with  cë’ity  can  take 
place, since here cë’ity takes a verbal complement. I will assume that it is pos-
sible for the VP complement to raise independently of cë’ity in some contexts, 
leaving the QP and the trace of VP to raise  and cliticize to -zhya’.   

 

4.3 Clausal Negation 

113 

 23.            

NegP

QP

Q’

Q
cë’ity
(neg) 

Neg’

Neg
dya’

...

VP 

ny-àa’z
(danced)

 
I will thus assume this to be the basic structure for clausal negation. I 
will discuss in detail the exact position of NegP in relation to other func-
tional projections in the remainder of this chapter. 

4.3.2 Doubly-Filled Comp Effects: More Evidence for the 

Structure of Clausal Negation 

There  is  evidence  that  the    cë’ity-verb  complex  undergoes  additional 
movement after raising into spec, NegP. This movement would be consis-
tent with the fact that  cë’ity, the verb, and -dya’ together are not treated as 
a  single  constituent,  as  exemplified  by  the  inability  of  the  modal  clitic  
-zhya’ to follow -dya’.  

This evidence for movement comes from the fact  that -dya’ is usually 
omitted in the presence of constituents to the left of cë’ity: Such contexts 
include wh-questions, relative clauses, and negated sentences with focus-
fronted arguments: 

“Who don’t you like?” 

 
24.  Tu cë’ity   r-yu’làa’z-u’? 
      who neg   hab-like-2s.inf 
     
 
25.  Me’s    [nih cë’ity  y-zhyàag Beed   yzh:ii]      n-u’uh      rèe’ 
 
teacher [that neg   irr-meet   Pedro tomorrow]  neut-exist  here 
 
“The teacher that Pedro won’t meet tomorrow is here” 
 
26.  Gye’eihlly cë’ity  n-àa       me’s 
      
 Mike         neg    neut-be  teacher 
     
“MIKE is not a teacher” 
 
Another context in which -dya’ is omitted is in the presence of the sen-
tence-final yes/no question marker èee. I will argue later in this section that 
this case can be accounted for identically with those above: 

 

 

114   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

27.  Cë’ity   r-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly bx:àady    èee? 
neg       hab-like      Mike         grasshopper Q 
 
 
“Doesn’t Mike  like grasshoppers?” 
 
Thus, the presence of overt material above NegP blocks the presence of 

-dya’. 

This  suggests  that  an  empty  projection  above  NegP  is  needed  if  both  
cë’ity and -dya’ are to appear.  This requirement can be accounted for by 
Koopman’s  (1996)  Generalized  Doubly-Filled  Comp  Filter  (GDCF), 
which rules that no projection may have both its head and specifier filled 
simultaneously.  Apparent  cases  of  specifier-head  agreeement  result  from 
string-vacuous movement of specifiers into higher, empty projections. 

Thus, the cëi’ty+verb complex actually raises to a higher position after 

passing through spec, NegP: 

 
28. 

 

 

CP

 

 
 
This  movement,  however,  is  blocked  when  the  head  or  the  specifier  
of  the  CP  projection  directly  above  NegP  is  overtly  filled  (by  either  a  
wh-word or a relative marker).3 

QPi

cëi’ty+verb

C

C’

ti

NegP

Neg’

Neg
-dya’

 
29. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

   
wh
 

CP

C’

C

NegP

QP

Neg

Neg
-dya’

 

 

 
 

                                                      
3 I assume, following Rizzi 1997, that CP actually consists of multiple functional 
projections, some of which may not be active or  available in certain construc-
tions. Evidence for multiple CP projections is given later in this chapter and in 
chapter  5. 

 

4.3 Clausal Negation 

115 

In these contexts, then, the QP containing  cë’ity    has no place to raise 
to  after  passing  through  the  specifier  of  NegP.  The  structure  is  thus  ill-
formed, since it violates the GDCF.  For the cë’ity-verb complex to stay in 
NegP, then, material in the head of NegP (-dya’) must be suppressed. If -
dya’ is not present, no linear or structural relation need be established be-
tween the complements of cë’ity: and -dya’ in the head of NegP, and the 
structure is thus licit. (Covert material, such as negative features that need 
to be licensed by movement through the specifier of NegP, however, may 
still be present.) 

  The absence of -dya’ in negated yes/no questions can be explained in 
similar  terms,  despite  the  fact  that  the  question  marker  surfaces  clause-
finally:  the yes/no question marker èee, like wh-words and relative mark-
ers, is generated above NegP in C, and the remainder of the sentence raises 
past    èee    to  the  specifier  of  CP  (and  then,  assuming  the  Generalized  
Doubly-Filled Comp Filter, on to some higher projection): 

 
30.  Cë’ity   r-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly bx:àady èee? 
 
 
 
 

neg    hab-like   Mike grasshopper Q 
“Doesn’t Mike  like grasshoppers?” 

 

CP

 

C
èee
(Q)

C’

QP

cë’ityVP

NegP

Neg
-dya’

Neg’

...

 
  Because the question marker èee  occupies C, and the remainder of the 
sentence raises to spec, CP, the raising of QP into CP is blocked. Since QP 
must  remain  in  NegP,  the  Generalized  Doubly-Filled  Comp  Filter  thus 
forces the suppression of -dya’, as in the wh-question and relative clause 
cases.  

If this analysis of -dya’ dropping is correct, it further supports the idea 
that negated verbs are VPs, rather than heads: if Koopman is correct and 
either specifiers or heads of projections may appear, and if  
-dya’  is  indeed  a  head,  as  previously  argued,  the  fact  that  verbs  remain 
overtly realized even when -dya’ is suppressed suggests that verbs cannot 
be heads that incorporate into -dya’.  

Furthermore,  this  supports  the  idea  that    cë’ity  is  the  specifier,  rather 
than head, of NegP: if VPs are indeed specifiers, and are always overtly 
realized in clausal negation, this suggests that the negative marker that ap-
pears with them also surfaces in Spec, NegP.  If -dya’ were the specifier of 
NegP, the requirement that -dya’ be omitted in certain contexts should also 
apply to verbs, under the assumption that the GDCF  is responsible for the 

 

116   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

absence of -dya’.  The fact that it does not suggests that -dya’ and the QP 
containing VP appear in different positions.  Since it is now clear the VP 
appears in specifier positions, -dya’ must appear in the head of NegP. 

Theoretical Consequences of the Generalized Doubly-Filled 
Comp Filter   
This analysis explicitly suggests that structural well-formedness be a con-
dition  fulfilled  at  spell-out  in  SLQZ:  movement  may  occur  for  strictly 
structural, rather than feature-checking reasons (as suggested by the addi-
tional movement of material from spec, NegP to spec, CP), and  deletion of 
material  at  PF  may  likewise  be  motivated  for  structural  reasons.  This  is 
consistent  with  both  Kayne’s  and  Koopman’s  formulations  of  antisym-
metry requirements. 

  Koopman’s Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter has further conse-
quences  for  grammatical  relations  in  SLQZ.  The  GDCF  is  motivated  by 
Koopman’s desire to recognize segments (defined here as branches domi-
nated  by  X’),  as  well  as  categories  (that  is,  XPs),  as  potentially  c-
commanding entities: she argues that there are cases in which X’s should 
be recognizable for linear and hierarchical mapping (such as incorporation 
of  one  head  into  another,  under  the  traditional  assumption  that  this  in-
volves adjunction of a head to an X’). Below, I repeat Kayne’s definition 
of c-command (Kayne 1994:16): 

 
31.  X c-commands Y iff X and Y are categories and X excludes Y and 

every category that  dominates X dominates Y  

 
 Under Kayne’s restrictions against entering segments into the computa-
tion of linear order of constituents, a standard head-incorporation structure 
such as (32), below, is illicit: 

 
32. 

 
IP

I

I’

Vi
gloat    -ed

I

VP

ti

V’

  In this structure, the verb “gloat”  has undergone head-movement and 
adjoined to I, which is headed by the tense marker “-ed”.  This structure is 
ruled  out  under  Kayne’s  account  because  the  linear  order  between  the 
raised  verb  “gloat”   and  the  inflectional  morpheme  “-ed”    cannot  be de-
fined under the preceding definition of c-command. Since neither the node 
dominating “gloat” nor that dominating “-ed” are categories (they are both  

 

4.3 Clausal Negation 

117 

I’s, thus segments of IP), neither can c-command the other, and thus, nei-
ther can be assigned linear precedence over the other. 

  Structures  such  as  (32),  however,  are  standardly  assumed  to  account 
for  head-incorporation  structures  such  as  inflected  verbs  and  compound 
word formation (Baker 1988, Kural 1996, among others). If such structures 
are indeed legitimate, Koopman argues, then Kayne’s formulation of anti-
symmetry  must  be  modified.  Koopman  proposes  that  segments  (such  
as  the  I’s  in  (32))  can  be  computed  into  c-command  relations,    so  that  
“gloat” ,  dominated  by  the  higher  I’,  asymmetrically  c-commands  “-ed”, 
dominated by both the higher and lower I’ segment.  

  Thus,  Koopman  assumes  the  following  modifications  to  Kayne’s  

c-command requirements: 

 
33.  Segments participate in c-command 
 
34.   Modified  Linear  Correspondence  Axiom  (LCA):  the  linear  order 

of overt terminal  elements corresponds to asymmetric c-command       
(Koopman 1996, p. 43-44) 

   
 
Recall from Chapter 2 that Kayne’s LCA determined that the linear or-
der of terminal elements corresponds to structural hierarchy, and structural 
hierarchy  is  determined  by  c-command.  Kayne,  however,  defines  c-
command as only a relation between categories (XPs).  Koopman’s modi-
fication of Kayne’s LCA differs from the original only in that X’s, as well 
as full XPs, may determine structural hierarchy and linear order. 

  Allowing  segments  to  participate  in  c-command  relations,  however, 
forces other structural constraints. If the specifier of IP is filled in struc-
tures such as  (35), then the computation of linear ordering again becomes 
problematic: 

 
35.         
IP
 

DP
  

I’ 

Mike 

I

VP 

Vi
I
gloat        -ed

V’

ti

                                
  In this structure,  I’ c-commands the specifier of IP (the DP headed by 
“Mike”). By the modified LCA,  the terminal dominated by  I’ (“gloated”) 
should thus precede “Mike”, which is obviously not the case. This struc-
ture, then, is illicit under Koopman’s analysis.  

  Koopman thus proposes the GDCF as a means of getting around this 
problem.    In  order  to  preserve  the  possibility  of  segments  being  used  
to  compute  c-command  relations,  the  GDCF  rules  that  either  heads  or 

 

118   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

specifiers can be overtly realized in a projection, but not both. Legitimate 
configurations are shown below: 

 
36. 

     

XP

 
 

YP
(full)

X

(empty)

 
37.       

XP

YP

(empty)

X

(full)

X’

...

X’

...

   
  Furthermore, Koopman argues  that not only are projections with both 
overt  heads  and  specifiers    blocked,  but  also  projections  with  both  their 
specifiers  and  heads  empty.  This  latter  restriction  is  due  to  visibility  re-
quirements: a projection must be semantically activated by the presence of 
lexical material at some point in the derivation. A projection that has not 
had any overt lexical material pass through it is thus semantically inactive. 
In  short,  Koopman’s  theory assumes that the semantic features of a pro-
jection  must  be  overtly  realized  within  the  projection  in  which  they  are 
generated. 

  Another consequence of the GDCF is that a number of additional pro-
jections  must  be  posited  to  accommodate  the  apparent  co-occurence  of 
specifiers and heads in sentences such as “Mike gloated” :  if the structure 
in (35) is illicit because both the specifier and head of IP are filled, there 
must be an additional projection available above IP for the subject Mike  to 
raise  into.  For  semantic  reasons,  this  higher  projection  must  be  distinct 
from that which houses question markers and wh-words, for instance. 

  The GDCF, then, appears to account for the distribution of cë’ity and  
-dya’  in  a  consistent  way:  assuming  that  cë’ity  and  -dya’  surface  in  the 
specifier and head of NegP, at some point in the derivation, then the con-
straint against their cooccurence when higher projections are filled can be 
simply explained. 

4.3.3 Irrealis Negation Effects in  Clausal Negation 

Another distinctive effect of clausal negation – and one which will be used 
as a diagnostic for syntactic structure in the remainder of this chapter – is 
its effect on the interpretation of verbs with Irrealis aspect marking. As de-
scribed in the previous chapter, Irrealis-marked verbs are used to express 

 

future-tense  events  (38);  under  the  scope  of  intensional  or  modal  verbs, 
they receive subjunctive-like readings (39). 

4.3 Clausal Negation 

119 

irr-sell     Mike       car 
“Mike will sell the car” 

hab-want irr-sell   Mike          car 
“Mike wants to sell the car” 

38.  Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
39.  R-càa’z   y-too’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
Verbs  with  Irrealis  aspect  marking  may  not  undergo  standard  clausal 
negation in matrix clauses. Instead, they are negated with a distinct nega-
tion pattern with cë’ity and -dya’   adjacent to each other, rather than flank-
ing the verb. This pattern was discussed in detail in the preceding chapter, 
and is exemplified again in the following example: 

 Cë’ity-dya’-rëng  g-wùall-rëng     li’ebr 
neg-dya-3p.prox   irr-read-3p.prox  book 
“They will not read the books” 

40. 
 
 
 
This structure, in contrast to the standard clausal negation structure, is 
biclausal:  the  Irrealis  verb  “read”  remains  in  TP  in  a  embedded  clause, 
while a covert existential verb in the matrix clause is the actual target of 
negation by cë’ity. See Section 3.3.2 for a detailed syntactic and semantic 
analysis of this construction. 

 

Irrealis verbs may, however, appear with the standard clausal negation 
pattern in embedded clauses. In this case, they receive indirect imperative, 
rather than simple future, readings, as seen in the preceding chapter. I will 
call this the Irrealis Negation Effect: 

cë’ity   g-wùall-dya-rëng       li’ebr 
neg      irr-read-dya-3p.prox book 
not to read the books”   

 
41.  R-e’ihpy Lia Pa’amm làa’rëng  
 
hab-tell  Ms. Pa’amm 3p.prox   
 
“Pam told them 
 
 
 
 
        ≠”Pam told them they will not read the books” 
 
The difference between the readings of the Irrealis verb “read” in (40) 
and (31) results from a difference in modality. While Irrealis verbs negated 
by  Future Negation get the same  simple future reading as matrix clause 
 
Irrealis verbs (they describe events that both the speaker and hearer assume
 
will be carried out in the actual word), under normal clausal negation, they
receive  the  same  subjunctive-like  reading  of  Irrealis  verbs  under  inten-
sional predicates and modals (they describe unrealized events in possible 
worlds).  

 

120   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

SLQZ modal verbs surface above other verbs in SLQZ. Thus, I assume 
that MoodP, where the expression of mood is triggered and syntactically 
licensed,  is  above  TP,  as  argued  in  the  preceding  chapter.  The  fact  that 
movement of Irrealis verbs under negation results in a modal reading of the 
verb  suggests  that  verbs  that  move  to  NegP  must  also  pass  through 
MoodP: 
42.    

NegP

QP

MoodP

cë’ity
g-wùall
(neg will.read)

tQP

TP

tQP

 
This activates modal features of the verb when they are present, as is the 
case with the modal aspects such as the Irrealis, which allow both modal 
and non-modal readings (Lee 1996). In cases in which the verb is marked 
with  one  of  the  non-modal  aspects  (which  lack  mood  features)  and  no 
other expression of non-indicative modality appears, MoodP is absent or 
inactive.  

To  sum  up,  then,  there  are  three  notable  semantic  features  of  SLQZ 
clausal negation: it is based upon specifier-head agreement within NegP, it 
requires further movement of material in spec, NegP to a higher projection 
(the GDCF), and it requires movement of verbs through MoodP in order to 
reach this higher projection (as shown by Irrealis Negation effects). These 
three features will be used to distinguish the basic clausal negation pattern 
just  described  from  the  superficially  similar  constituent  negation  pattern 
also commonly used in SLQZ. 

’

4.4  Constituent Negation 
Another frequently used negation pattern involves the negative morpheme 
a’ti , which may be used to negate both verbal and non-verbal constituents. 
In this section, the distribution of other fronted constituents in a’ti’ nega-
tion constructions will be used to determine the inventory and ordering of 
high (CP) level functional projections in SLQZ. 

A’ti’ negation involving verbs or arguments generally results in contras-
tively focused negative readings, while a’ti’ negation involving non-verbal 
predicates does not always force focus readings. A’ti’ negation is superfi-
cially  similar  to  clausal  negation:  a’ti’  precedes,  and  -dya’  follows,  the  
negated constituent, which may be verbal or non-verbal: 

 

 
 
 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

121 

neg teacher-dya’ neut-be Mike 
“Mike is not a teacher” 

43.   A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa     Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
On  closer  examination,  however,  a’ti’      negation  differs  syntactically 
from clausal negation. First, there are no doubly-filled comp effects in a’ti’ 
negation constructions: -dya’  must always be present, even in structures 
involving wh-movement: 

 
44.  Tu a’ti’ me’s (*-dya’)      n-àa? 
 
 
 
Second, focus-fronted constituents are disallowed in a’ti’ constructions, 

who neg teacher  (*-dya’) neut-be 
“Who isn’t a teacher?” 

with or without -dya’: 

 
45.  *Gye’eihlly a’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa 
 
 
 
This  is  in  direct  contrast  with    clausal  negation  structures,  which  do  

Mike            neg teacher-dya’neut-be 
“MIKE isn’t a teacher” 

allow focus (in the absence of -dya’) as seen in  (26). 

Fronted  constituents,  however,  are  allowed  as  left-dislocated  topics, 
with  the  topicalized  constituent  appearing  a  second  time  in  the  base  
position: 

Mike     neg teacher -dya’  neut-be Mike 
“(As for) Mike, he’s not a teacher” 

 
46.  Gye’eihlly a’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa    Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
This  suggests  that  focused-fronted  and  left-dislocated  topic  arguments 
occupy different syntactic positions, and that left-dislocated topics land in 
higher positions than focused constituents. Moreover,  QPs headed by a’ti’  
raise higher than QPs headed by cëi’ty. Cë’ity   surfaces below FocP, thus 
allowing focused constituents to precede it, but a’ti’ appears either in or 
above  FocP,  thus  blocking  other  focused  constituents  (but  still  allowing 
left-dislocated topics, which may surface above FocP):  

 

 

122   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

47. 

 

  

 

 
TopP1

FocP

a’ti’

XP

cë’ity

NegP

VP

 
 

I will assume that the high position in which left-dislocated topics ap-
pear, TopP1, is one of two topic positions used in SLQZ. Evidence for  an-
other,  lower,  topic  position  will  be  presented  later  in  this  chapter.  (The 
presence  of  topic positions both above and below FocP has been argued 
for in Italian by Rizzi (1997).) 

The higher landing position of a’ti’ also accounts for the fact that it in-
variably  cooccurs with the negative element -dya’.  Since a’ti’  is always 
forced to raise out of NegP (for reasons to be elaborated in the following 
sections), the Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter never requires -dya’ 
(in the head of NegP) to be suppressed. 

A  third  difference  between  a’ti’  negation  and  clausal  negation  is  that 
there are no Irrealis Negation effects with a’ti’.  Irrealis verbs under a’ti’ 
negation don’t get modal readings: 

 
48.  A’ti’ y-tòo’oh-dya’ Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
neg   irr-sell-dya’     Mike         car 
 
“Mike won’t SELL a car (he’ll buy one)” 
 
Recall  from  the  previous  section  that  the  modal  readings  of  Irrealis 
verbs  under  clausal  negation  are  triggered  by  raising  of  the  VP  through 
MoodP on the way to NegP. The lack of modal readings of verbs under 
a’ti’  negation  suggests  that  either  -dya’  and  the  verb  are  lower  in  this  
context  than  in  clausal  negation,  or  that  for  some  reason  the  verb  is  not  
required to pass through MoodP in a’ti’ negation constructions.  

These  patterns,  however,  raise  questions  about  where  negation  is  li-
censed in constituent negation constructions: if -dya’ is the  head of NegP, 
and  NegP  is  above  MoodP  (as  argued  in  the  previous  section),  then  the 
non-modal interpretation of the negated Irrealis verb in  (48) is unexplain-
able. Likewise, the absence of doubly-filled comp effects in a’ti’ construc-
tions suggests that a’ti’ raises higher than cë’ity, -dya’ is generated lower 
in a’ti’ constructions than in cë’ity constructions, or both. 

 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

123 

  
4.4.1 The Case for NegP2 

I will propose that constituent negation is licensed in a lower negative pro-
jection  distinct  from  that  in  which  clausal  negation  is  licensed:  in  brief, 
SLQZ has two NegPs, a high one above MoodP in which clausal negation 
is realized (NegP1) and a lower one, below MoodP but above TP, in which 
constituent  and  focus  negation  is  realized  (NegP2).  The  placement  of 
NegP2 directly above TP is suggested by the fact that negated non-verbal 
constituents always appear directly above the verb, which sits in spec, TP, 
as seen in the following examples: 

49.  A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly 
 

neg teacher dya  is   Mike 
“Mike is not a teacher” 

 
 

neg with   fork          dya’ perf-eat  Mike tortilla 

50.  A’ti’  cuann tenedoor-dya’ b-da’uw Gye’eihlly gueht 
 
       “Mike didn’t eat tortillas with a fork” 
 
On the assumption that -dya’ is base-generated as the head of NegP and 
remains in situ throughout the derivation (as in the clausal negation cases), 
NegP2 would have to be above TP, but below MoodP. 

 The  existence  of  two  co-existing  NegPs  was  independently  proposed 
for the Romance languages by Zanuttini (1991), who argues that the higher 
NegP1  takes  tensed  constituents  as  its  complements,  while  the  lower 
NegP2 takes (non-tensed) VP as its complement. Thus, in (48),  
-dya’ surfaces below NegP1 in the head of NegP2. 

The  idea  that  a’ti’    negation  is  licensed  in  NegP2,  which  (following 
Zanuttini 1991) takes non-tensed complements,  is consistent with the fact 
that  a’ti’  negates  both  non-verbal  constituents  and  contrastively  focused 
verbs. Contrastive  negation of verbs differs from clausal negation of verbs 
in  that  in  the  former  case,  tense  takes  scope  over  negation,  while  in  the 
 latter, negation takes scope over tense.  

This contrast can be seen in the following two English examples. In the 
first , a standard case of clausal negation, the existence of an entire past 
event of eating is being negated. In the second case, in which eat is given 
contrastive focus, it is not the event (including temporal frame) itself being 
negated,  but  only  the  content  of  the  action  that  took  place  during  this 
event. In syntactic terms, only the verb, and not the tense features assigned 
to the verb, is being negated:  

51.  Mike didn’t eat 

“there is no past eating event involving Mike” 

 
52.  Mike didn’t EAT (he drank) 

“In some past event involving Mike, it was not the case that he ate 
(he did something else)” 

 

124   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

Thus, while in clausal negation,  negation takes scope over both tense 
and the lexical content  of the verb, in constituent/focus negation, negation 
is under the semantic scope of tense, but over the negated constituent it-
self. 

Thus,  the  relative  placement  of  the  two  negative  projections  is  as  fol-

 

lows: 
53. 
 

NegP1

MoodP

NegP2

TP

AgrSP

AgrOP

 
 I assume that when NegP1 is active, NegP2 is absent, and vice versa. 
This  is  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  the  GDFC,  which  states  that 
projections  can  only  be  active  if  either  their  heads  or  specifiers  (but  not 
both)  contain  overt  material  at  some  point  in  the  derivation.  An inactive 
projection that doesn’t attract any other constituent, then, would be illicit. 

4.4.2 Proposed Structure 

In this section, I will describe the proposed structures for a’ti’ negation 
of both verbal and non-verbal constituents. While essentially parallel, the 
slight  differences  between  these  structures  provide  revealing  diagnostics 
for the existence of additional preverbal projections in SLQZ, as well as 
diagnostics for more general conditions on movement in SLQZ. 

I assume that a’ti’ negation of both verbal and non-verbal constituents 
originates from the same basic structure: a’ti’   is generated in a QP taking 
the negated constituent as its complement, parallel to the relation between 
the clausal negation marker cë’ity  and negated verbs. I will consider first 
the case of contrastively focused verbs under a’ti’, such as that in (48): 

 
54. 

Q’

QP

Q
a’ti’
neg

VP

ytòo’oh
will sell

 

 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

125 

From here, the QP headed by a’ti’ raises to TP to check the tense fea-

tures on the VP remnant: 

 
55. 

 

QP

a’ti’  ytòo’oh
neg  will.sell

TP

T

T’

AspP

Asp’

Asp …

-dya’ is generated as the head of NegP2 in a’ti’ negation. The a’ti’-verb 

complex raises to spec, NegP2: 

 
56. 

 
        NegP2

QP

Neg’

a’ti’ ytòo’oh
negwill.sell

Neg
dya’

TP

tQP

 
This  configuration  checks  the  negative  features  on  a’ti’  via  spec-head 
agreement with -dya’. However, it violates the GDCF since both the head 
and specifier of NegP2 are filled simultaneously. The QP headed by a’ti’  
needs  to  raise  out  of  NegP2  into  a  higher  projection,  and  thus    raises  to 
FocP. This both contributes to the (usual) focused reading of the negated 
expression, and accounts for the fact that focused constituents can’t appear 
with a’ti’. 

There is evidence for the existence of the additional projections marked 
as XP and YP in the tree above,  between TP and FocP. Evidence for these 
projections will be presented in the following sections. 

 

 

126   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

57.       

FocP

QP

a’ti’ytòo’oh

Foc’

Foc

XP

X’

X

YP

Y’

Y MoodP

Mood

’

Mood NegP2

Neg’

Neg
-dya’

TP

t
QP

T’

T

…

The preceding derivation, however, raises the question of how it is pos-
sible for the QP to raise to FocP while bypassing MoodP: since a’ti’ nega-
tion does not trigger Irrealis Negation effects, I had argued previously that 
verbs  negated  by  a’ti’  do  not  pass  through  MoodP.  The  difference  
between focus negation with a’ti’ and clausal negation with cë’ity, which 
does trigger Irrealis Negation effects, can be explained in terms of Relativ-
ized Minimality.  

Movement into NegP can be considered A-movement in SLQZ, along 
the lines of movement of verbs into T: this is supported by the fact that 
simple  clausal  negation  actively  interacts  with  purely  morphological  and 
structural processes such as verb movement and affix-hopping in English 
and  other  languages.  (One  possibility  is  that  the  VP  remnant  that  raises 
into  spec,  NegP2  in  (57)  turns  NegP2  into  a  derived  A-position.)  Thus, 
movement  of  a  QP  headed  by  the  clausal  negation  marker  cë’ity  into 
NegP1, generated above MoodP, would be A-movement, and will conse-
quently be required to target all intervening A-positions, including MoodP. 
Movement  of  NegP  into  FocP  or  higher  positions  in  the  CP  domain, 
however,  is  A’-movement.  Since  NegP2  is  below  MoodP,  A-movement 
into  NegP  by  constituents  negated  by  a’ti’  takes  place  below  MoodP. 
Movement  of  the  negated  constituent  out  of  NegP2  into  FocP  to  check  
focus  features  is  A’-movement,  and  thus  bypasses  MoodP,  which  I  will  
assume is an A-position.  

 

4.4 Constituent Negation

 

127 

The possibility that a’ti’ negation bypasses MoodP is supported by the 
fact  that  a’ti’  negation  may  take  place  in  sentences  in  which  MoodP  is  
activated by another constituent: 

neg    Mike-dya’         supposed.to irr-be student-good 
“MIKE isn’t supposed to be a good student.” 

 
58.  A’ti’ Gye’eihlly-dya’ nuhnguehll g-a’c studya’aann-za’c 
 
 
 
In this structure nuhnguehll, “supposed to” is what ML label a “modal 
auxiliary”:  like  English  modal  auxiliaries,  it  has  an  invariant  Neutral 
tense/aspect  form  and  does  not  take  any  subject  marking.  SLQZ  modal 
auxiliaries select Irrealis verbs with modal readings. I leave aside the exact 
structural details of modal auxiliary constructions, but it is clear that mo-
dality is independently encoded by the auxiliary, the Irrealis verb, or both 
in (58). Since MoodP is active, and occupied by the verb or the auxiliary, 
it is clear that the a’ti’ complex is able to raise licitly past a filled MoodP. 
This structure also accounts for the lack of DFC effects in a’ti’ negation, 
since a’ti’ and -dya’ always surface at some distance from each other, as 
seen in (57). 

4.4.3 Non-Verbal Negation with a’ti’ 

Now I turn to a’ti’ negation involving non-verbal constituents. These con-
structions are parallel to verbal a’ti’ negation: negation targets NegP2 and 
involves further movement of the negated constituent out of NegP2.  I will 
show, however, that here is a slight difference between structures in which 
nonverbal  predicates  (such  as  59)  are  negated,  and  those  in  which  other 
constituents (such as 60) are: 

 
59.  A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly 
neg teacher-dya’ neut-be Mike 
 
 
“Mike is not a teacher” 
 
60.  A’ti’ Pamm-dya’ z-èe làa’ Cris z-èe 
 
 
 
In  these  constructions,  as  in  the  verbal  negation  cases,  a’ti’  is  base-
generated as the head of a QP taking the negated constituent as its com-
plement.  The  complex  formed  by  a’ti’  and  its  complement  raises  to 
NegP2, as in the verbal negation cases, and then, in the cases where the 
negated constituent is interpreted contrastively, to FocP: 

neg  Pam-dya’    def-go foc Chris def-go 
“PAM didn’t leave, Chris did” 

 

 
 
 
 

 

128   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

61. 

FocP

QP
Pamm

a’ti’
n
eg Pam

Foc’

Foc

XP

X’

X

YP

Y’

Y MoodP

Mood

’

Mood NegP2

QPt

Neg’

Neg
-dya’

TP

VP
zèe
left

T’

T

AgrSP

 
Nonverbal predicates  negated with a’ti, however, do not normally re-
ceive  contrastive  focus  readings,  and  overt  focus  movement  in  SLQZ  is 
generally  reserved  for  purely  contrastive,  as  opposed  to  presentational,  
focus. Thus, negated nonverbal predicates  must raise to some other posi-
tion above NegP2.  

In the following sections, I will show that there is independent evidence 
for the existence of such a position, and independent  motivation for non-
verbal predicates to make use of it. 

4.4.4 A’ti’ in Matrix and Relative Clauses: Evidence for PredP 

The first piece of evidence for the existence of the projection XP between 
FocP and TP comes from the interaction of focus and a’ti’ in matrix and 
relative clauses. In the previous section, I argued that a’ti’  raises to focus: 
this  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  negative  sentences  with  a’ti’    disallow  
focus-fronted constituents: 

62.  *Gye’eihlly a’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa 
 
 
 

 Mike        neg teacher-dya neut-be 
“MIKE isn’t a teacher” 

 
 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

129 

Relative  clauses,  however,  reveal  a  difference  in  distribution  between 
a’ti’  and  focus-fronted  constituents:  while  focus-fronted  constituents  are 
disallowed  in  relative  clauses  (64)    constituents  negated  by  a’ti’  are  
allowed (65): 

top food   [rel hab-like       Mike           perf-lie on table 
“The food that Mike likes is on the table” 

top food   [rel  Mike  hab-like ]               perf-lie on table 
“The food that MIKE likes is on the table” 

 
63.    A comiied [nih r-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly] b-èe’b lohoh me’s 
 
 
 
64.  *A comiied [nih  Gye’eihlly r- yu’lààa’z] b-èe’b lohoh me’s 
 
 
 
65.  Bùunny [nih a’ti’ campesyenn-dya’n-àa] nu’uh rèe’ 
 
 
This  suggests  that  a’ti’  does  not  occupy  FocP  in  relative  clauses,  but 
rather, appears below FocP, but above TP. (Since the next position above 
a’ti’  in  (65)  is  occupied  by  the  relative  marker,  it  is  unlikely  that  a’ti’  
occupies a position higher than FocP.) 

person  rel  neg  farmer-dya’      neut-be neut-exist here 
“The man who’s not a farmer is here” 

Further evidence for a position between FocP and TP—and a hint to its 
semantic  and  syntactic  function—comes  from  the  fact  that    predicate 
nominals  may  appear  preverbally  in  relative  clauses,  while  contrastively 
focused constituents can’t: 

top man    rel   farmer         neut-be neut-exist here 
“The man who’s a farmer is here” 

 
66.  A bùunny nih campesye’nn  n-àa nu’uh rèe’ 
 
 
 
67.  *Bròo’oh  ra bx:àady nih mnii’iny b-da’uh 
 
big            pl  grasshopper rel boy perf-eat 
 
“The grasshopper that THE BOY ate are big” 
 
Thus, predicate nominals land lower than FocP in relative clauses, but 
must still be above TP, since they precede the copula.  The existence of a 
distinct  projection  for  the  licensing  of  nonverbal  predicates  (PredP)  has 
been independently proposed for Dutch and other languages (Kayne 1997,  
Zwart,  1993).  In  SLQZ,  predicate  nominals/adjectives  generally  appear 
above tensed copulas; this suggests PredP is fairly high in SLQZ (above 
TP). I will thus assume that the preverbal projection XP in (57) and  (61) 
is, in fact, PredP, and is the projection into which negated nonverbal predi-
cates surface in relative clauses: 

 

FocP

130   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 
  
68. 
 
 
        
          
 
          
          
          

PredP

Pred’

Foc

Foc’

QP

          
          
     
          
          
          
          
          
          
 
 
 

  
          
          
  

a’ti’me’s
neg teacher

Pred YP

Y’

Y

MoodP

Mood’

Mood

NegP2

tQP

Neg’

Neg
dya’

TP

VP

 T’

n-àa
is

 T 

AgrSP

 
          
 
          
 
Evidence  that  PredP  is  not  only  above  TP,  but  above  MoodP,  comes 
from  the  fact  that  fronted  predicate  nominals  may  occur  in  sentences  in 
which Irrealis verbs receive modal readings: 

Gye’eihlly
Mike 

DP

....

69.  R-càa’z Gye’eihlly nnsini’cy g-ahc zhi’ny zhya’p Gye’eihlly 
 
 

hab-want Mike      intelligent irr-be child    girl       Mike 
“Mike wants his daughter to be intelligent.” 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

131 

 
In this example, the fronted predicate “intelligent” precedes an Irrealis 
verb with a subjunctive, rather than simple future, reading. Since  subjunc-
tive  readings  result  from  movement  through  MoodP,  this  structure  sug-
gests that the preverbal position hosting the adjectival predicate – PredP – 
is above MoodP. 

 The Interaction of FocP and PredP 
Non-verbal  predicates  most  often  appear  preverbally,  although  they  may 
also  appear  postverbally.  In  almost  all  cases,  nonverbal  predicates,  like 
constituents negated with a’ti’, behave as if they were in FocP when they 
appear  preverbally.  Like  contrastively  focused  constituents,  they  block 
other preverbal material, such as wh-words and focus-fronted arguments: 

green        neut-be   apple 
“The apple is green” 

who neut-be brother-3s.prox 
“Who is his brother?” 

 who brother-3s.prox neut be 
“Who is his  brother?” 

 
70.  Tu n-àa       behts-ëng? 
 
 
 
71.  *Tu behts-ëng n-àa? 
 
 
 
Fronted adjectival, as well as nominal, predicates block wh-movement: 
 
72.  Ngàa’ah   n-àa        mannsaan 
   
   
 
73.  Xi mannsaan n-àa     ngàa’ah? 
    what apple    neut-be green 
   
 
74.  *Xi mannsaan ngàa’ah n-àa? 
    what apple       green     neut-be 
   
 
Embedded  clauses  (apart  from  relative  clauses  and  complements  of  
certain modal expressions, which I will leave aside here) generally allow 
focused  arguments.  Wh-words,  however,  cannot  be  extracted  from  
embedded clauses that contain focused constituents: 

“Which apple is  green?” 

“Which apple is green?” 

 

 

132   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

what hab-think 2s  irr-eat Mike? 
“What do you think Mike will eat?” 

75.  Xi r-ralloh lìu’ [g-a’u Gye’eihlly t]? 
 
 
 
76.  *Xi r-ralloh lìu’ [Gye’eihlly ga’u t]? 
what  hab-think 2s      Mike     irr-eat 
 
 
“What do you think MIKE will eat?” 
 
In  (76),  wh-movement  of    xi  “what”  out  of  the  embedded  clause  
is  blocked  by  the  presence  of  Gye’eihlly  “Mike”  in  the  preverbal  focus 
position. 

The possible interpretation of wh-questions is also affected by  focus is-
land effects. In (77), for instance, x:a mo’od “how” (on its manner inter-
pretation)  may  be  interpreted  as  modifying  or  questioning  the  embedded 
clause:    

 

77.  X:a mo’od r-ralloh lìu’ [y-zëhnny Gye’eihlly]? 
 
 

what way hab-think 2s.inf     irr-arrive Mike 
“How do you think Mike will arrive?” 
[e.g.,  “By  what  form  of  transportation  do  you  think  Mike  will  
arrive?”/“What makes you think MIKE will arrive?”] 

 
In (78), the subject of the embedded clause (“Mike”) appears in the pre-
verbal focus position. In this case, x:a mo’od “how”  cannot be construed 
as questioning the embedded clause: 

 
78.  X:a mo’od rralloh    lìu’       [Gye’eihlly  y-zëhnny ]? 

what way  hab-think 2s.inf     Mike          irr-arrive 
“How do you think MIKE will arrive?” 
[e.g., “What makes you think MIKE will arrive?”/*”By what form 
of transportation do you think MIKE will arrive?”] 

 
Thus, x:a mo’od “how”  is blocked from raising out of the embedded 
clause. If it is indeed generated there, the derivation crashes. Because the 
wh-expression  cannot  escape  the  embedded  clause,  it  cannot  receive  the 
same interpretation as (77), in which “how”  can be interpreted as ques-
tioning material in the embedded clause. 

The  only  way  for  wh-movement  to  occur,  and  for  the  sentence  to  be 
grammatical, is to generate x:a mo’od in the matrix clause, where no pre-
verbal  material  blocks  its  movement.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  x:a  mo’od 
should only be interpretable as questioning material in the matrix clause. 
This prediction is borne out, as seen by the single possible interpretation of 
(78). In (78), x:a mo’od “how” can only question the addressee’s thinking, 
not  Mike’s  arriving.  Thus,  there  are  interpretive,  as  well  as  structural,  
effects that result from the islands formed by focused constituents. 
 
 

 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

133 

Inside  relative  clauses,  however,  the  distinction  between  contrastively 
focused constituents and preverbal nonverbal predicates becomes clear: the 
former are blocked in relative clauses, while the latter are allowed: 

fat          child       rel  perf-eat grasshopper 
“The child who ate grasshoppers is fat” 

fat     child               rel  grasshopper perf-eat  
“The child who ate GRASSHOPPERS  is fat” 

 
79.  Ndyo’oh mnii’iny nih b-da’uh bx:àady 
 
 
 
80.  *Ndyo’oh mnii’iny nih bx:àady     b-da’uh  
 
 
 
81.  A bùunny nih campesye’nn g-uhc nu’uh rèe’  
 
 
This  patterning  is  vaguely  reminiscent  of  V2  effects  in  Germanic  lan-
guages: in these languages, V raises to C (the highest head in the clause) 
when  no  complementizer  is  present,  but  stays  low  when  an  overt  C  is  
present. 

top man    rel     farmer        perf-be neut-exist here 
“The man who was a farmer is here” 

The fact that focused constituents and predicate nominals show different 
distribution in relative clauses supports the view that FocP and PredP are 
distinct projections, with PredP being lower than FocP, but still above TP.  
These raises the question, however, of why they both appear in FocP when 
not  in  relative  clauses:    If  a’ti’  and  nonverbal  predicates  may  be  below 
FocP in relative clauses, why not in other contexts? 
 
4.4.5 The Focus Criterion 
Another  context  in  which  a  similar  asymmetry  between  relative  clauses 
and  regular  matrix and embedded clauses occurs is in the case of -zhya’ 
cliticization.  As  described  in  the  previous  chapter,  fronted  constituents 
modified  by  the  modal  clitic  -zhya’    block  focus  movement  in  matrix 
clauses, and thus were argued to surface in FocP themselves: 

 

 
82.    Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’-rëng 
 
 
 

Los Angeles-might    neut-exist-3p.prox 
“Los Angeles might be where they are (not somewhere else)” 

 

134   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

83.  *Gye’eihlly   Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’uh 
 Mike        Los Angeles-might neut-exist 
 
 
“MIKE might be in Los Angeles” 
 
However,    constituents  with -zhya’  may  appear  preverbally  in  relative 

 

 

clauses: 

 
84.  A zhyàa’p nih Lia Olieb-zhya’ cë’ity r-umbèe’    n-u’uh rèe’ 
top girl  that   Ms. Olivia-might neg hab-know neut-exist here 
 
“The girl that Olivia might know/that might know Olivia is here” 

 
This suggests that constituents modified by  -zhya’, like predicate nomi-
nals, are required to raise to FocP in all cases except in relative clauses, 
where they obligatorily remain below FocP. 

The inability of focused constituents to appear in relative clauses stems 
from the fact that relative clauses inherently involve wh-movement from 
inside  the  relative  clause  to  the  specifier  of  the  relative  clause.    This 
movement either involves a covert operator base-generated inside the rela-
tive  clause  and  coindexed  with  a  relative  clause  head  base-generated 
higher in the structure (as traditionally assumed) or overt movement of the 
relative clause head itself from a base-generated position inside the relative 
clause to its surface position outside of it (Kayne 1994, Vergnaud 1985). 

Wh-movement  itself  involves  the  focus  projection,  and  is  blocked  by 
filled  FocPs,  as  seen  by  the  preceding  data.  This  has  also  been  noted  in 
Hungarian, among other languages; cf. Horvath 1986. (However, as I will 
make clear in the next chapter, while wh-movement involves focus move-
ment, wh-movement and focus movement are not a single, interchangeable 
process.) Thus, in relative clauses, FocP is always occupied by the trace of 
the  wh-moved  constituent.  Because  FocP  is  always  filled  in  relative 
clauses, nonverbal predicates cannot occupy it: they must either remain in 
their base post-verbal positions, or must raise only as far as PredP. 

But what about the non-relative-clause cases? Why is movement of pre-
verbal non-verbal predicates to FocP required? That is, why can’t focused 
constituents co-occur with preverbal predicates in PredP, since movement 
of  nonverbal  predicates  to  FocP  is  clearly  not  necessary  for  them  to  be 
licit, as seen by their presence in PredP inside relative clauses? 

I will propose the following: The fact that movement to FocP is obliga-
tory in the absence of other focused constituents or wh-words suggests that 
FocP has a strong tendency to attract constituents, and that SLQZ prefers 
for FocP to be filled whenever possible. Thus, I will argue that the follow-
ing condition holds: 

 
85.  Focus Criterion: FocP must be overtly filled at some point in the 

derivation 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

135 

This can be motivated semantically, as well as empirically. Focus serves 
to express new information, and all linguistic expressions involve convey-
ance of new information. In the absence of contrastively focused informa-
tion 
itself  
represents a proposition to be contrasted against previous background in-
formation. 

focused  arguments), 

(such  as 

the  entire 

sentence 

Thus, the Focus Criterion is reflected in the syntax in the following way: 
When a constituent is contrastively focused, it raises to spec, FocP. In the 
absence of contrastive focus, the entire clause (TP) raises to FocP (irrele-
vant projections omitted): 

 
86. 

 

FocP

TP

Foc’

Foc

....t

When a non-verbal predicate or a negated non-verbal predicate raises to 
PredP, it undergoes further movement itself to satisfy the Focus Criterion. 
This  effectively  blocks  the  possibility  of  additional  focused  constituents 
within the clause: 

 
87. 

 

FocP

 

NP/AdjP

Foc’

Foc

PredP

t

 
Movement of the XP predicate itself to FocP, rather than movement of 
the entire clause dominated by PredP, is motivated reasons of economy: In 
his  (1992,  1995)  Minimalist  program,  Chomsky    argues  that  multiple 
movements of a single constituent constitute formation of a single chain,  
and thus count as a single move. This argument was motivated by need to 
reconcile  the  often-conflicting  requirements  that  syntactive  structures  be 
derived  by  means  of  the  shortest  moves  possible  (Chomsky’s  “Shortest 
Moves” condition) and the smallest number of moves possible  (the “Few-
est Steps” condition). These requirements come into conflict in a number 
of  derivations,  such  as  successive-cyclic  wh-movement,  in  which  wh-
words move long distances by landing in a number in intermediate posi-
tions: while this is consistent with  “Shortest Move”, it violates “Fewest 
Steps”.   Chomksy’s chain-formation condition, then, reconciles this con-
flict.   

 

136   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

Returning  to  SLQZ,  this  would  mean  that  movement  of  a  non-verbal 
predicate to PredP, then subsequent movement of TP would result in the 
formation of two separate chains, thus two moves. This is a more costly 
option in Minimalist terms than movement of a non-verbal predicate into 
PredP, then into FocP, which would count as only a single move. The co-
occurrence  restrictions  between  fronted  nonverbal  predicates  and  focus 
support this: if the preverbal predicate were required to only raise as far as 
PredP,  nothing  would  stop  other  contrastively  focused  constituents  from 
raising past it into FocP. Certainly, no semantic factors would prevent this. 
Thus,  this  co-occurrence  restriction  must  be  driven  by  strictly  syntactic 
considerations. 

The  Focus  Criterion  also  explains  the  relative  rarity of sentences with 
multiple preverbal constituents, despite the existence of numerous prever-
bal  projections:  because  Minimalist  requirements  force  any  constituent 
raised to a preverbal position to also raise though FocP to satisfy the Focus 
Criterion, the presence of additional constituents in Focus is thus blocked. 
Thus,  fronted  non-verbal  predicates  and  fronted  constituents  with  the  
modal clitic -zhya’ cannot co-occur with other focused constituents, even 
though no semantic factors would prevent this. 

In this section, then, I have argued for two points: first, for the existence 
of  a  preverbal  projection  PredP  directly  below  FocP;  and  second,  for  a 
general  requirement  that  FocP  be  overtly  activated  in  all  SLQZ  clauses 
(the Focus Criterion). In the next section, I will present evidence for the 
second preverbal projection beneath focus posited in the trees in (57) and 
(61):  TopP2,  a  topic  projection  that  occupies  the  position  directly  below 
PredP. 

4.4.6 Evidence for TopP2: The Interaction of Topics and 

Negation 

Now I turn to the identity of the projection marked YP in the preceding 
trees. I will show that this projection is the lower of two topic projections 
in SLQZ. SLQZ has two types of topics: left-dislocated topics, which in-
volve a resumptive copy of the topic in the body of the clause, and topics 
preceded by the topic marker a : 

 
88.  Gye’eihlly xi b-da’uh Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
 

Mike        what perf-eat Mike 
“(As for) Mike, what did he eat?” 

4.4 Constituent Negation 

137 

89.  A Gye’eihlly b-da’uh bx:àady 
 
 

TOP Mike    perf-eat   grasshopper 
“Mike (whom we were talking about) ate grasshoppers”  

 

Left-dislocated  topics  are  high.  They  may  precede  focus-fronted  con-
stituents and wh-words (as seen in the preceding example); a-topics appear 
preverbally  (thus  above  TP),  but  surface  below  FocP  (evidence  for  this 
will  be  presented  shortly.)    I  thus  assume  two  independent  topic  projec-
tions: TopP1, which is above FocP and houses left-dislocated topics; and 
TopP2, which houses a-topics. 

The  interaction  of  a-topics  with  verb  movement  gives  suggestive  evi-
dence as to the exact location of TopP2. As noted in the previous chapter,  
a-topics block the raising of verbs past the adverb al “already”: 

top Mike    already perf-eat grasshopper 
“Mike already ate the grasshoppers” 

 
90.  A Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady 
 
 
  
91. 
 
 
 
Contrastively focused arguments, on the other hand, do not block such 

 *A Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady 
top Mike    perf-eat  already grasshopper 
“Mike already ate the grasshoppers” 

movement. 

Mike    already perf-eat grasshopper 
“MIKE already ate the grasshoppers” 

 
92.  Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady 
 
 
 
93.  Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady 
 
 
 
Thus, TopP2, the licensing projection for a-topics, occupies a position 
lower than focus. (Potentially, TopP2 could be the position targeted by VP 
remnants moving past al, “already”.) Also notable is the fact that a-topics 
cannot co-occur with negation (either clausal or constituent): 

Mike    perf-eat  already grasshopper 
“MIKE already ate the grasshoppers” 

 
94.  *A Gye’eihlly cë’ity b-da’uh-dya’ bx:àady 
 
 
 

top Mike     neg    perf-eat-dya’ grasshoppers 
“Mike didn’t eat the grasshoppers” 

 

138   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

95.  *A Gye’eihlly a’ti’ doctoor-dya’ n-àa 
top Mike        neg doctor-dya’ neut-be 
 
 
“Mike isn’t a doctor” 
 
The fact that a-topics cannot co-occur with a’ti’ negation is consistent 
with the argument that a’ti’ generally raises through PredP to FocP, and 
TopP is below both PredP and FocP. The fact that they cannot co-occur 
with clausal negation (that is, with cë’ity) also supports the idea that TopP 
may be even lower than PredP: Recall from Section 2.2 that clausal nega-
tion structures do allow focus-fronted constituents: 

 
96.  Gye’eihlly cë’ity b-da’uh  bx:àady 
Mike     neg    perf-eat grasshoppers 
 
 
“MIKE didn’t eat the grasshoppers” 
 
When focus appears with clausal negation, -dya’ is generally dropped, 
as  previously  noted.  This  effect  was  argued  to  be  a result of the GDCF, 
whereby -dya’, the head of NegP, is dropped so that cë’ity, the specifier of 
NegP,  may remain in NegP1 when specifiers of  higher projections are 
oc

cupied and prevent its further movement. 
It  is  possible  (though  less  common),  however,  for  -dya’  to  appear 

overtly in clausal negation cases with focus fronting: 

Mike         neg    perf-eat-dya’grasshoppers 
“MIKE didn’t eat the grasshoppers” 

 
97.  Gye’eihlly cë’ity b-da’uh-dya’ bx:àady 
 
 
 
This suggests that cë’ity  and the negated verb  have the option of rais-
ing  into  a  projection  higher  than  NegP1,  but  lower  than  FocP,  when 
overtly focused constituents appear. (It is unclear why this option is dis-
preferred.) This position could either be PredP or TopP.  

Either possibility would be consistent with the idea that a-topics surface 
in positions below FocP. If cë’ity  raised into PredP, the co-occurrence 
restriction between cë’ity  and a-topics could be accounted  for by the fact 
that  a-topics  need  to  occupy  either  PredP  itself  or  some  lower  preverbal 
position. As previously argued, however, PredP is reserved for the licens-
ing  of  nonverbal  (untensed)  arguments:  thus,  it  would  be  inconsistent  to 
posit PredP as a possible landing position for cë’ity  and negated verbs in 
clausal negation structures. 

If cë’ity  and the verb raised into TopP, below PredP, however, the in-
ability of a-topics to appear with clausal negation can be accounted for in 
similar terms: both the fronted topic and cë’ity  are competing for the same 
position (spec, TopP), and thus cannot appear together. 

 

4.4 Constituent Negation

139 

The possibility of cë’ity  and the verb occupying TopP is supported by 
the fact that the topic marker a may also precede verbs. (It is unclear what 
the semantic contribution a makes in these contexts): 

 
98.  A b-ìi’lly Gye’eihlly li’ebr 
 
 
 
While  focused  constituents  may  not 

top perf-read Mike book 
“Mike read the book” 

intervene  between  fronted  
wh-words and verbs, the topic marker a may appear preverbally after wh-
words: 

who   top perf-read book 
“Who read the book?” 

 
99.  Tu     a     b-ìi’lly      li’ebr? 
 
 
 
This supports the idea that constituents modified by the topic marker a , 
including verbs, surface in their own projection (TopP) below both FocP 
and PredP. This is also consistent with the argument that the clausal nega-
tion marker cë’ity  and the negated verb can raise into TopP. 

The possibility of clausal negation structures both with and without  

-dya’  raises  a  more  general  question:  if  syntactic  structures  converge  on 
the most economical derivation possible, why should structures like (97), 
which involve additional movement into TopP, be allowed to co-exist in 
SLQZ along with more economical structures such as (96)? A reasonable 
conjecture  would  be  that  the  two  structures  differ  in  semantics  or  prag-
matic  usage.  This  would  be  consistent  with  Minimalist  assumptions  that 
movement  is  driven  by  the  feature-checking  requirements  of  the  moved 
constituent, and that functional projections contain semantic or structural 
features that satisfy these requirements. Movement of a negated constituent 
into TopP in (97), then, must necessarily involve checking of a Topic fea-
ture encoded in the negated constituent.  Movement into TopP is not moti-
vated, and thus, not permitted, in the absence of Topic features. Thus, the 
negated constituent in (96), which surfaces in NegP1, can be assumed to 
lack a Topic feature. 

In short, there is evidence for an additional functional projection below 
FocP and PredP—TopP—that houses fronted topics and serves as a poten-
tial  landing  spot  for  negated  constituents  in  certain  syntactic  configura-
tions. The inventory of preverbal functional projections argued for in this 
chapter, then, is as follows: 

 

140   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

 

100. 
 

TopP1

FocP

PredP

TopP2

NegP1

MoodP

NegP2

TP

 
Moreover,  it  can  be  shown  that  movement    into  any  of  the  numerous 
functional projections argued for in this section is motivated by both the 
structural  requirements  of  Antisymmetry  and  the  feature-checking  re-
quirements of the moved constituents. Convergent derivations must satisfy 
both sets of requirements. 

 

4.5 Existential Negation: the Tèe’bag Construction 

The third negation construction I will discuss is existential and indefinite 
negation: that is, the formation of negative constructions such as no X, no-
body, and nothing.  This construction, which is more complex than those 
previously  discussed,  will  shed  light  on  a  number  of  other  grammatical 
constructions in SLQZ, such as the expression of indefiniteness and quan-
tification.  It  will  also  show  that  VP-raising  can  account  for  not  only  the 
syntactic  behavior  of  SLQZ,  but  some  semantic  behavior  as  well.  I  will 
begin this section with a descriptive overview  of these constructions, then 
move to a syntactic analysis. 

4.5.1  Negative Indefinites 

In constructions expressing negative indefinites (such as nothing, nobody, 
and nowhere), tèe’bag and a wh-word directly precede the verb, and -dya’ 
directly follows the verb: 

 
101.  Tèe’bag calìi   ch-o’o-dy-ënn izhih 
 
 
 

no          where irr-go-dya’-1p   tomorrow 
“We won’t go anywhere tomorrow” 

 

4.5 Existential Negation 

141 

102.  Tèe’bag tu g-a’uw-dya’ gueht 
          no      who irr-eat-dya’ tortilla 
         “No one will eat tortillas” 
 
This closely parallels the formation of non-negative indefinites (such as 
something, someone  etc.), which are formed with the verb nu’uh “exist” 
followed by a wh-word and a verb taking the indefinite as an argument:   

 “Someone ate tortillas” 

 
103.  N-u’uh      tu       b-da’uh gueht 
         neut-exist   who  perf-eat tortilla 
      
 
Tèe’bag may negate more than one argument simultaneously: 
 
104.  Tèe’bag tu xi cay-a’uw-dya’ 
          no      who what prog-eat-dya’ 
          “No one is eating anything” 
 
105.   Tèe’bag tu    cali        ny-ied-dya’ 
          no      who where   subj-go-dya’ 
      
 
No  constituents may appear between the wh-indefinite and the verb in 

 “No one went anywhere” 

negative indefinite constructions: 

no    what Mike      subj-eat-dya’ 
“Mike didn’t eat anything” 

 
106.  *Tèe’bag xi Gyeeihlly n-yauw-dya’ 
 
 
 
The use of wh-words as indefinite pronouns in tèe’bag negation is remi-
niscent  of  similar  constructions  in  numerous  languages,  such  as  Chinese 
(Cheng 1991, Li 1992), Tzotzil (Aissen 1992) , Dutch (H. Koopman, p.c.) 
and Western Apache (Potter 1997), in which wh-words under the scope of 
negation are interpreted as indefinite pronouns or negative polarity “any”, 
rather  than  as  question  markers.  I  will  return  to  examine  these  parallels 
more closely later in this chapter. 

4.5.2 Existential Negation 

Existential  negation  constructions  are  formed  with  the  negative  word 
tèe’bag and a wh-word that serves as an indefinite marker referring to the 
negated constituent. In these constructions, the wh-indefinite corresponds 
in animacy to the negated constituent. The  wh-word  is followed by the 
ne

gated nominal itself, then the negative clitic  -dya’ : 
 

 

142   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

 

107.   Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap 
          no       who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes 
          “No student ate potatoes” 
 
108.   Tèe’bag xi gueht-dya’ b-da’uw-a’ 
         no      what tortilla-dya’ perf-eat-1s 
      
 
This construction differs from that of negative indefinites in that -dya’ 
follows the negated nominal itself, rather than the verb. In the next section, 
I will discuss the semantic motivation for this difference. 

 “I ate no tortillas” 

4.5.3 Semantic Correlates    

 

The differences in structure between the existential negation constructions 
in (101-102) and the negative indefinite constructions in (107-108) reflect 
differences in the semantic structure of the events involved. Thus, the pre-
ceding two  negative indefinite examples can be paraphrased as  follows: 

 
109.   Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap 
          no       who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes 
          “No student ate potatoes” 
          “There exists no x, x a student, such that x ate potatoes” 
 
110.   Tèe’bag xi gueht-dya’ b-da’uw-a’ 
           no      what tortilla-dya’ perf-eat-1s 
      
           “There exists no x, x a tortilla, such as I ate x” 
 
In  these  cases,  the  value  of  x  is  restricted:  existential  negation  only 
holds of x if x has the property of being a student in (109), for example. 
Thus, the negated constituent serves as the restrictor on quantification. The 
scope of negation appears to be reflected in the placement of the negative 
elements tèe’bag and -dya’: tèe’bag precedes, and -dya’ directly follows, 
the nominal that serves as the  restrictor. 

  “I ate no tortillas” 

In the negative existential constructions (111-112), in contrast, there is 
no explicit restrictor on quantification. This is made explicit by the glosses 
below: 

 
111.  Tèe’bag tu g-a’uw-dya’ gueht 
         no      who irr-eat-dya’ tortilla 
        “No one will eat tortillas” 
        “There exists no x such that x eats tortillas” 
 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

143 

112.  Tèe’bag xi cay-a’uw-dy-a’ 
          no      what prog-eat-dya’-1s 
          “I’m not eating anything” 
         “There exists no x such as I’m eating x” 
 
In these cases,  x is not restricted to having a particular property, as it 
in (109-110).  The negation can be interpreted as taking scope over the 
tire event: (111) can be paraphrased “There will be no event of anyone 

is 
en
eating tortillas” and (112) as “There is no event of me eating anything.” 

The  postverbal  position  of  -dya’  is  semantically motivated by the fact 
that verbs in SLQZ are in fact raised VPs. If inflected verbs in SLQZ are 
indeed VPs, not V heads, then they contain the traces of raised arguments. 
These traces could be treated as variables that can be bound by their raised 
antecedents and/or quantifiers such as tèe’bag. 

Assuming that  nonspecific indefinites reconstruct into VP at LF and are 
interpreted in the nuclear scope and bound by existential closure  (as pro-
posed by Diesing 1992), then tèe’bag and -dya’ can be seen as negating 
the entire event denoted by the VP and its reconstructed indefinite argu-
ments. In other words, (111) can alternately be glossed “there was no event 
of anyone eating tortillas”.  Thus, the postverbal position of -dya’ reflects 
the  fact  that  negation  in  these  constructions  takes  scope  over  an  entire 
event, rather than a restrictor of quantification. 

Positing inflected verbs as VPs also makes the examples in (107-108)  
consistent syntactically with those in (101-102): in both cases, tèe’bag...
-
dya’ can be seen as directly preceding and following phrasal projections, 
rather than a phrasal projection in one case and a verbal head in another.  

4.5.4 Towards a Syntactic Structure for  Tèe’bag  

Constructions 

This  section  presents  a  syntactic  analysis  of  these  constructions.  First,  
I will examine other non-interrogative uses of wh-words in SLQZ. Then, 
will review common features of wh-indefinites in other languages, and 
I
examine  how  analyses  made  for  these  languages  can  be  applied  to  SLQZ. 
From this point, I will develop a detailed syntactic structure for the tèe’bag 
constructions previously described.  

 

Wh-Indefinites and Non-Interrogative Wh-Words in SLQZ 
As  previously    noted,  wh-words  are  also  used  as  indefinite  pronouns  in 
non-negative existential constructions with the verb nu’uh: “exist”.  These 
structures are strikingly similar to the tèe’bag constructions with negated 
indefinites: for one, nu’uh  may take scope over more than one argument 
(as may tèe’bag), and the order the indefinites appear in is fixed: 

 

 

144   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

 “Someone ate something” 

  “Someone ate something” 

113.   N-u’uh      tu     xi      b-da’uw 
         neut-exist   who what perf-eat 
      
 
114.  *N-u’uh      xi     tu      b-da’uw 
           neut-exist   what   who  perf-eat 
      
 
115. 
            no      who what prog-eat-dya’ 
           “No one is eating anything” 
 
The  appearance  of  more  than  one  preverbal  wh-word  in  nu’uh  and 
tèe’bag  constructions  is  surprising,  since  SLQZ  only  marginally  allows 
multiple wh-questions (and some speakers do not allow them at all). This 
suggests that wh-indefinites in these contexts behave differently from in-
terrogative wh-expressions. 

 Tèe’bag tu xi cay-a’uw-dya’ 

The  similarity  in  structure  between  tèe’bag  and  nu’uh  constructions 
suggests  that  tèe’bag  and  nu’uh  are  the  same  type  of  constituent.  Since 
nu’uh  is clearly a verb (it may take different aspect markers, as well as 
subject agreement clitics for pronominal subjects), it may be possible that 
tèe’bag  is  a  predicate,  rather  than  a  quantifier.  Direct  evidence  for  this, 
however, is difficult to find: tèe’bag does not take aspect or subject agree-
ment markers, so if it is a predicate, it is a morphologically impoverished 
one.  Evidence  against  the  predicate  status  of  tèe’bag,  however,  comes 
from the fact that cëi’ty may also appear interchangeably with tèe’bag in 
negative existential and negative indefinite constructions. These structures 
are identical to those formed with tèe’bag, except for the presence of cë’ity 
: 

 

 
116.  Cë’ity   tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap 
          neg       who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes 
        “No student ate potatoes” 
 
If  cë’ity  is  indeed  a  quantifier  ( as  was  argued  earlier)  it  is  highly 
unlikely that a syntactically distinct constituent should be able to replace it 
freely in otherwise identical structures.4  

Wh-words are used as indefinite pronouns in a second existential con-
struction as well. In this construction, the wh-words are preceded by the 
word dòonn “whether, if”. The example below  shows do’onn used with its 

                                                      
4 Munro (class lectures), however, suggests that the fact that cëi ty  may appear 
with pronominal subject agreement markers in sentences with negated Irrealis 
verbs suggests the possible verbal/predicational status of cëi'ty . She also points 
to other languages in which negation is realized by verbal forms. (A different 
account for the cooccurrence of cëi ty  and subject agreement markers, which 
assumes the quantificational status of cëi ty , is proposed in Lee 1996 (summa-
rized in the preceding chapter)). 

,

,

,

 

4.5 Existential Negation

145 

independent  meaning  of  “whether/if”  (in  which  it  introduces  an  indirect 
question); the examples that follow show its use with wh-indefinites: 

 
117.  R-càaz-zy-a’    g-ahcbì-a’ do’onn a r-zehnny 
 

hab-want-just-1s irr-know-1s if already hab- arrive 
“I just want to know if 

 

 

e-mail rèe’ lòo’ 
e-mail this to.you 
this e-mail gets to you”      
(ML, entry for do’onn) 

  
 
118.  Ngaista’ do’onn cali ch-o’-nn     nah zhih 
in.a.while if      where irr-go-1p  now day 
 
“Later  today,  we’ll  go  somewhere  (we  don’t know where)” 
(ML, 

entry for do’onn) 

 
119.  Do’onn x:a mo’od g-uny-ih 
 

if         what way irr-do-3s.prx 
“I’ll do it somehow (I don’t know how)” (ML, entry for do’onn) 

 
The do’onn-wh construction differs from the nu’uh-wh construction in 

that it does not allow more than one wh-indefinite to follow it directly: 

 
120.  Tòo’oh      ch-i-gwì    -ënn  dòonn tu g-uuny gaan 
 let’s.go irr-go-see-1p          if        who irr-do win 
 
 
“Let’s go see who wins” 
 
121.  *Tòo’oh  ch-i-gwì    -ënn  dòonn tu xi g-uuny gaan 
 
 
 
Both the do’onn and nu’uh indefinite formation constructions, however,  
express  only  non-specific  (narrow-scope)  indefinites.  As  the  examples 
above show, do’onn-wh can only denote still-unidentified entities. A simi-
lar (but less marked) distinction holds for nu’uh indefinites, as seen in the 
contrast below: 

let’s.go  irr-go-see-1p        if        who what  irr-do win 
“Let’s go see who wins what ” 

 
122.  A teihby     nih r-umbèe Gyeeihlly z-uu jwer 
 
top one rel hab-know Mike  def-stand outside 
 
“Someone that Mike knows is outside” 
 
123.  N-u’uh tu         nih r-umbèe Gyeeihlly z-uu jwer 
 
 
 

neut-exist who rel hab-know Mike  def-stand outside 
“Someone that Mike knows is outside” 

 

146   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

Garcia notes a difference in speaker presupposition between (122) with 
teihby, and (123) with nu’uh tù. The teihby example would be used if, for 
instance, only one person were at the door and the speaker knew that Mike 
knew this person. The sentence with nu’uh tu would be used if there were 
more than one person at the door, and the speaker had reason to believe 
that Mike knows one of these people, but had no idea which of these peo-
ple it would be. In short, teihby can be used to refer to specific indefinites, 
while  nu’uh -wh refers to non-specific indefinites. 

SLQZ wh-words may also be used non-interrogatively (that is, in con-
texts other than direct or indirect wh-questions) in a number of other, non-
existential constructions.  

what week 
“What a week!”  (ML, entry for xi) 

Xi “what”, for instance, may be used to introduce exclamatives: 
 
124.  Xi tuxhmaan! 
 
 
Xi also appears as part of the lexical expression xi zhë’b  “how much” 
used in exclamatives of degree. (Note that zhë’b  by itself can also be used 
to mean “how much”; the semantic redundancy present in the gloss of the 
following example, compounded by the presence of  zyè iny  “a lot”, shows 
that the expression xi zhë’b  has probably become lexicalized: 

 
125.  Xi zhë’b     zyèeiny r-a’uhw-u’ 
what how.much a.lot hab-eat 2s 
 
 
“How much you eat!” 
 
Xi  also  appears  in  a  number  of  other  lexicalized  expressions  denoting 

(ML, entry for xi zhë’b) 

time. 

 

degrees or periods of time:    

 
126.  Xi wyahc s-aa zhi’ny-a’ 
 
 

what time    def-walk child-1s 
“It will be a long time until my child walks”   
(ML, entry for xi wyahc  ) 

 
127.  Xi laa zhih 
 
 

what name day 
“a long time ago” 
(ML, entry for xi laa zhih) 

 

 
Temporal expressions with xi seem to denote markedly long periods of 

A  possibility  that  I  will  consider  is  that  these  expressions  are  derived 
from exclamatives such as “(what a) long time”, etc. This analysis is con-
sistent with both the syntactic parallel between these expressions and true 
exclamative uses of xi “what” such as (124), and with the observation that 
exclamatives introduced by wh-words can only be predicated on qualities 

4.5 Existential Negation

147 

that can be measured on a gradable scale, such as size and time  (Cresswell 
1973, cited in Gutiérrez Rexach 1996): 

 
128.  How tall he is! 
 
129.  What a long time this is taking! 
 
These  expressions  also  differ  from  other  wh-indefinite  expressions  in 
that the wh-expression is clause-initial, as it is generally in wh-questions: 
in  tèe’bag  and  existential  constructions,  the  wh-word  appears  to  get  its 
non-interrogative,  indefinite  reading  by  being  preceded  by  a  negative  or 
existential  term.  In  short,  the  indefinite  interpretation  of  wh-words  in 
SLQZ  appears  to be syntactically determined.  Syntactic and semantic 
mo

tivation for this constraint will be examined in the next section. 

The Use of Wh-Indefinites in Other Languages 
Wh-words appear with indefinite, rather than interrogative, uses in a num-
ber  of  languages  unrelated  to  SLQZ  (such  as  Chinese  (Cheng  1992,  Li 
1991), Hungarian (Cheng 1992), Tzotzil (Aissen 1992), Dutch (H. Koop-
man, p.c.), and Western Apache (Potter 1997)). In these languages, as in 
SLQZ, the indefinite use of wh-words is limited to certain syntactic con-
texts.  Below,  I  will  give  brief  synopses  of  the  salient  features  of  wh-
indefinite  constructions  in  Chinese  (the  most  widely  documented  of  the 
languages with wh-indefinites) and Western Apache (whose wh-indefinite 
constructions share important semantic features with those in SLQZ). 

In  Chinese,  wh-words  may  be  interpreted  as  indefinite  pronouns  in 
negative  constructions  (130),  yes/no  questions  (131),  conditional  clauses 
(132), and in complements of non-factive verbs (133): 

he not like what 
“He doesn’t like anything”    
(Li 1992, p. 127) 

 
130.  Ta bu xihuan shenme 
 
 
  
 
131.  Ta xihuan shenme ma? 
 
 

he like      what     Q 
“Does he like something/anything?”    
(Li 1992, p. 128) 

 
132.  Yaoshi/Ruguo  ta xihuan shenme... 
 
 

if                      he like     what 
“If he likes anything...”      
(Li 1992, p. 128) 

 

 
These contexts have been posited as “affective contexts” (Cheng 1991, 
p.  112),  and  “contexts  in  which  the  truth  value  of  the  proposition  is  not 
fixed in a definite manner” (Li 1992, p. 134). 

Li  supports this definition by pointing out that wh-words receive may 
also  receive  indefinite  readings  in  the  presence  of  adverbs  expressing 
speaker  uncertainty  (such  as  “probably”)  and    grammatical  particles  ex-
pressing a speaker’s lack of direct experience of an event he/she is assert-
ing to be true. 

Furthermore, the availability of indefinite readings for wh-expressions is 
syntactically,  as well as semantically, constrained in Chinese: in negated 
sentences, for instance,  wh-words can only be interpeted as indefinites if 
c- commanded by negation. Thus, object, but not subject, wh-words may be 
interpreted as indefinites in negative contexts: 

he not like    what 
“He doesn’t like anything” (Li 1992, p. 135) 

 
134.  Ta bu xihuan shenme 
 
 
 
135.  Shenme ren bu xihuan ta? 
 
 
 
 
Li thus treats wh-indefinites as variables that require c-command by a 

what     man not like  he 
“Who does not like him?” 
“ Someone does not like him” (Li 1992, p. 135) 

local binder. This seems to parallel their usage in SLQZ. 

 Western Apache, an Athabaskan language, likewise uses wh-words as 
indefinites in certain semantic and syntactic contexts. One salient context 
in which wh-words receive indefinite, rather than interrogative, readings is 
when  they  directly  precede  the  marker  shi.    (Compare  (136)  and  (137)). 
Shi can also be used as a modal particle that modifies entire clauses (138): 

136.  Hadín kih náágole’ ? 
 
 

  who  house 3sg.imprf.build 
 
“Who is building a house?” 
(Potter 1997, p. 94) 

 

 
137.  Hadínshi  kih náágole’? 
 
 

  who.UNCERT  house 3sg.imprf.build 
 

“Someone is building a house”   
(Potter 1997, p. 94) 

148   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

 

 
133.  Wo yiwei/renwei/cai/xiwang ni xihuan shenme (dongxi) 
 
 

I     think/think/guess/hope you   like what (thing) 
“I think/think/guess/hope you   like something”     
(Li 1992, p. 128) 

 

 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

149 

138.  Nailín magashi   naízyood shi 
 
 

girl     cattle       3sg.perf.herd might 
“The girl might have finished herding the cattle”      
(Potter 1997, p. 93) 

 
 

 

Potter analyses shi  as a head that takes either clauses or wh-indefinites 
as  complements:  these  complements  then  raise  to  the  specifier  of  the  
projection in which shi  is generated, thus accounting for the fact that shi 
directly follows the constituents it modifies. 

Potter  draws  a  semantic  parallel  between  the  modal  and  indefinite-
forming uses of shi: in its modal use, shi serves to express speaker uncer-
tainty  about  the  truth  of  an  event  (such  as  whether  the  cattle  have  been 
herded in (138)). When used as indefinites, wh-words in Western Apache 
assert  the  existence  of  something  without  committing  the  speaker  to  
knowing the exact identity of this element. Thus, shi serves to express a 
tentative level of speaker assertion of an event in both contexts. In the fol-
lowing section, I will outline an application of this idea to SLQZ. 

4.5.5 The Syntax of WH-Indefinites in SLQZ 

The previous section showed that wh-indefinites in SLQZ may appear in 
the following contexts: in tèe’bag negation constructions, in narrow-scope 
indefinite constructions, and in exclamative constructions and lexicalized 
expressions potentially derived from exclamatives. 

These  contexts  share  a  common  semantic  feature:  like  wh-indefinite 
constructions in Chinese, they represent propositions with reversed or un-
fixed truth values.  That negation reverses the truth value of a proposition 
is  obvious.  Exclamatives,  as  noted  often  in  the  literature  (Lewis  1972, 
cited in Gutiérrez Rexach 1996) are distinguished by the fact that they do 
not have inherent truth values of their own (there is no way, for instance, 
that  an  exclamative  such  as  “What  a  week!”  can  be  posited  to  have  an  
absolute truth value). 

The  use  of  wh-indefinites  in  existential  constructions  appears  at  first 
glance to be a counterexample to this, but the fact that only non-specific 
indefinites may be expressed in constructions with wh-indefinites supports 
the idea that the speaker is expressing uncertainty about the identity of a 
participant  in  the  event  being  described.  The  weak  level  of  speaker  cer-
tainty  in  these  contexts  seems  to  parallel  the  “tentative  assertion”  ex-
pressed  by  wh-words  in  the  specifier  of  a  modal  marker  in  Western 
Apache. 

This raises the issue of how this translates into a syntactic structure. The 
existential  and  tèe’bag    structures  suggest  that  SLQZ,  like  Chinese,  re-
quires  wh-indefinites  to  be  c-commanded  by  an  operator.  Furthermore, 
wh-words  in  affective  contexts  such  as  conditional  clauses  and  yes/no 
questions only receive indefinite readings when preceded by nu’uh. This 
supports Cheng’s  (1991) idea that wh-indefinites are necessarily bound by 

 

150   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

existential closure, and suggests that nu’uh/tèe’bag is responsible for pro-
viding existential closure over wh-indefinites in these contexts: 

irr-tell-2s  1s      if    neut-exist where irr-go Mike 
“Tell me if Mike goes anywhere” 

 
139.  Y-nnì-ùu’ nàa’    bàll  n-u’uh calì    y ch-ìa’ Gyeeihlly 
 
 
 
140.  N-u’uh     tu     ca-ya’uw ee? 
 
 
 
Thus,  in  SLQZ  the  mere  appearance  in  an  affective  context  is  not 
enough  to  license  the  indefinite  reading  of  wh-words:  they  must  also  be  
syntactically  dominated  (c-commanded)  by  a  semantically  appropriate 
li
censer, such as tèe’bag or nu’uh. 

neut-exist who prog-eat Q 
“Is anyone eating?” 

4.5.6 The Syntax of Tèe’bag  Negation 

In  the  previous  section,  I  showed  that  the  wh-words  in  tèebag  negation 
constructions  are  indefinite  pronouns  that  need  to  be  syntactically  (and 
semantically) licensed by tèebag. In the following sections, I will present 
explicit  syntactic  analyses  of  negative  indefinite  and  existential  negation 
constructions. First, I will address the position of tèebag  itself, then turn to 
the negative indefinite and existential negation constructions themselves. 

Where is Tèe’bag? 
Tèe’bag  shares  many  distributional  features  with  a’ti’.  For  one,  tèe’bag  
negation,  like  a’ti’  negation,    may  appear  in  wh-questions  (141)  but  not 
with focus-fronted constituents (142): 

 
141.  Tu tèe’bag xi li’ebr-dya’ ny-ùall 
who no what book-dya’ subj-read 
 
 
“Who didn’t read any book?” 
 
142.  Gye’eihlly tèe’bag xi ny-a’uhw-dya’ 
Mike        no         what subj-eat-dya’ 
 
 
“Mike didn’t eat anything/*MIKE didn’t eat anything” 
 
Fronted arguments can only be interpreted as answers to wh-questions, 
not as contrastively focused. The following can only be used as an answer 
to the question “Who didn’t eat anything?”. 

This suggests that like a’ti’, tèe’bag generally surfaces in FocP. How-
ever,  like  a’ti’,  tèe’bag  may  also  appear  at  the  left  edge  inside  relative 
clauses: 

 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

151 

143.  Studya’aann nih tèe’bag tu mee’s-dya’r-yu’lààa’z n-u’uh rèe’ 
 

student       that no     who teacher-dya’ hab-like neut-exist here 
“The student who no teacher likes/who likes no teachers is here” 

 
As shown in section 4.4.4, this is a position in which focused constitu-
ents are normally blocked. This was used as evidence that a’ti’ surfaces in 
PredP, a position above TP, but below FocP in relative clauses.  I thus 
as

sume that tèe’bag does as well. 
Another  parallel  between  a’ti’  negation  and  tèe’bag    negation  is  that 
there are no GDCF effects in tèe’bag   constructions: -dya’  is obligatory 
even when preverbal constituents such as wh-words appear: 

 
144.  *Tu tèe’bag xi li’ebr  ny-ùall 
who no what book  subj-read 
 
 
“Who didn’t read any book?” 
 
 This suggests that like a’ti’,  tèe’bag  obligatorily surfaces in a position 

above NegP. 

Like a’ti’ negation, tèe’bag  negation also shows  no Irrealis Negation 
effects: Irrealis verbs under tèe’bag  negation receive standard future read-
ings, rather than imperative or subjunctive-like readings: 

no        what irr-eat-dya’ Mike 
“Mike won’t eat anything” 
 

 
145.  Tèe’bag xi   g-a’uh-dya’ Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
This indicates that verbs negated by tèe’bag , like those negated by a’ti’, 
move through NegP2 rather than NegP1: since they do not change modal 
features under negation, they do not pass through MoodP as do verbs that 
undergo clausal negation with cë’ity. This in turn indicates that the nega-
tive features of tèe’bag (and the constituents it negates) must be checked 
below MoodP. Thus, tèe’bag negation, like a’ti’ negation, is licensed by 
movement through the lower negative projection, NegP2.  

 

 

The Syntax of Negative Indefinites 
The negative indefinite construction is composed of the tèe’bag-wh com-
plex followed by the verb, then the particle -dya’. Below is an example 
re

peated from above: 

no         who perf-eat-dya’ tortilla 
“No one ate tortillas” 

146.  Tèe’bag tu b-da’uh-dya’ gueht 
  
 
 
From the previous sections, it should be clear that the underlying struc-
ture  for  this  construction  must  meet  several  criteria:  first,  wh-indefinites 
must precede the verb and surface directly after tèe’bag; second,  tèe’bag 

 

152   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

must raise at least as high as PredP;  third, negation must be licensed in the 
lower negative projection, NegP2; and finally, both the wh-indefinites and 
the verb must appear under the scope of  
-dya’. 

 
 

A: 
 

Tèebag 
Nobody 

Tu r-indyalààa’z-u’? 
who hab-believe-2s.inf 
“Who do you believe?” 

I will thus assume the following derivation for negative indefinites.  
As previously mentioned, tèe’bag is problematic in that it patterns with 
nu’uh    “exist”,  a  verbal  predicate,  in  how  it  forms  sentences  with  wh-
indefinites, yet it lacks verbal morphology and behaves like a quantifica-
tional determiner. For instance, it can be used as a stand-alone negative 
an

swer to a question: 
 
147.  Q: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  If it is a determiner, however, then it is puzzling how it can take scope 
over more than one wh-indefinite – each originating as an independent 
ar

gument – simultaneously.  
These facts can be reconciled as follows: tèe’bag, like cëi’ty, is a quanti-
fier that selects a VP complement. However, while cëi’ty can take any VP 
as its complement, tèe’bag allows only one verbal complement: a covert 
existential verb that is essentially a silent version of nu’uh.  This covert ex-
istential verb, in turn, takes as its complement the overt VP and its argu-
ments (irrelevant projections omitted below):5 

 
148. 

 

QP

Q’

Q
tèe’bag
neg

V’

VP

V

E

VP

 

tu bda’uh gueht
who ate tortilla

 
A consequence of this is that tèe’bag itself cannot be posited to have its 
own existential force: this must come from the covert existential predicate 
it  takes  as  its  complement.  Rather,  tèe’bag  itself  encodes  only  negation. 
                                                      
 The presence of a covert existential predicate under clausal negation in  future
5
 Ir

realis constructions  was also argued for in Chapter 3. 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

153 

Thus,  the  clausal  negation  marker  cë’ity,  which  also  subcategorizes  VP 
complements, may appear interchangeably with tèe’bag  in negative exis-
tential constructions. This also accounts for why tèe’bag constructions so 
closely resemble existential constructions: they contain a covert existential 
structure. 

Further evidence for the presence of a covert existential predicate comes 
from  the  following  utterance  recorded  in  San  Lucas  Quiaviní.  Here,  a  
related  negative  word  tèeru’  “no  more”  appears  in  a  negative  existential 
construction  with  no  visible  verb:  instead,  tèeru’  is  followed  by  a  
wh-indefinite pronoun then -di’:6 

 
149.  Tèeru xi di          èee? 
no.more what dya’ Q 
 
 
“There isn’t anything else?” 
 
This structure appears to be parallel to the future Irrealis negation con-

structions discussed earlier in this chapter. 

I  assume  the  structure  in  (148)  is  monoclausal:  a  single  set  of  inflec-
tional projections dominates both the covert existential VP and its lexical 
VP complement. In short, the covert existential simply forms an additional 
VP shell as part of the main predicate. 

The wh-indefinite subject above is generated  as a normal argument of 
the lexical VP, in the specifier of VPcaus. (Wh-indefinite objects are like-
wise generated like normal object DPs.)  It then raises to adjoin to spec VP 
(VPasp,  which  contains  an  spatiotemporal  event  argument  in  its  specifier 
(this  point  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  chapter)).  This  marks  the  wh-
indefinite as a variable identified with the event denoted by the verb. 

In  constructions  with  more  than  one  wh-indefinite,  the  lower  one  ad-
joins to spec, VPasp, then the higher wh-indefinite adjoins to the lower one. 
For instance, in (150) xi “what”  adjoins to bda’uw  “ate” then tu “who”   
to xi. 

 

150.   Tèe’bag tu     xi      b-da’uw-dya’ 
         neg   who what perf-eat-dya’ 
      
 

 “Nobody ate anything” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
6 Tèe’bag itself is potentially bimorphemic: -bag is a common clitic used to ex-
press emphasis. I will assume, however, that tèe’bag  is treated as a single lexi-
cal item. 

 

154   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

VPasp

V’

tj

V
b-
perf

DP

D’

D
xii
what

DP

D’

D
tuj
who

VPcaus

V

V’

ti

VP

V’

V

-da’uh
eat

However, the head of VPasp is already occupied by the Perfective aspect 
marker b-. Thus, the wh-indefinite (or indefinites) cannot remain in spec, 
VPasp  without  incurring  a  GDCF  violation;  it  must  subsequently  move 
elsewhere. I will return to this point momentarily. 

In the preceding example, then,  the wh-indefinite tu is generated VP-

internally as the subject of “eat”: 

 
151.  Tèe’bag tu b-da’uh-dya’ gueht 
  
 

no         who perf-eat-dya’ tortilla 
“No one ate tortillas” 

VPasp

V
  b-
perf.

 

V’

DP

D’

D
 tu
who

VPcaus

V’

 V 

VPstem

 DP

gueht
tortilla

V’

V

-da’uh
 eat

 

 

From  this  base  configuration,  the  DP  object  (“tortillas”)  raises  out  to 

spec, AgrOP, as usual, and  tu raises to the specifier of VPasp: 

4.5 Existential Negation

155 

152.      

AgrOP

DPj

AgrO’

AgrO

QP

D’

 D 
  
gueht
tortilla

Q’

Q

tèe’bag
neg

  

 

VP

V
E

V’

DPi

D’

 D 
 tu
who  

VPasp

V’

V
b-
perf.

VPcaus

ti

V’

V

VPstem

 tj

V’

V

-da’uh
 eat

 
However,  tu “who” is in an illegal configuration: as previously noted, it 
appears in the specifier of the highest VP shell, VPasp, which already con-
tains  an  overt  head  (the  Perfective  aspect  marker  b-),  in  violation  of  the 
GDCF. In order to surface in a legal configuration, tu must raise out of VP. 
I assume that it raises into the specifier VP of the covert existential verb. In 
constructions  where  more  than  one  wh-indefinite  appears,  the  adjoined 
wh-indefinite DPs likewise raise together into this position. 

Next,  the  entire  QP,  including  its  lexical  verbal  complement,  raises 
through TP into the specifier of NegP2. (Projections not directly involved 
in this movement have been omitted for clarity): 

 

 

156   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

153. 
 

NegP2

QP

Neg’

tèe’bag tu bda’uh
no  who ate

Neg
dya’

TP

tQP

T’

 T 

AgrSP

AgrS

AgrS’

AgrOP

DP

gueht
tortilla

AgrO’

AgrO

t

 
This movement checks the tense features of the lexical verb (I assume 
the  covert  existential  shares  these  tense  features)  as  well  as  the  negative 
features of  tèe’bag.)  

As previously argued,  tèe’bag appears to surface in PredP (in relative 
clauses) or FocP (in other contexts). This suggests that  the QP headed by 
tèe’bag, like those headed by a’ti’, raises out of NegP into PredP (where it 
stays  in  relative  clauses),  then  to  FocP  (where  it  surfaces  in  other  con-
texts).  As  in  the  cases  of  negated  nonverbal  predicates  with  a’ti’,    this 
movement is not driven by focus features on the negated constituent (since 
negated indefinites do not receive a focused reading), but by economy and 
the need to satisfy the Focus Criterion. 

Negative Existentials 
The  negative  existential  construction  differs  from  the  negative  indefinite 
construction in that -dya’ appears after a negated nominal, rather than after 
the verb. As noted in Section 4.3, this reflects a difference in the scope of 
negation  between  the  two  constructions:  in  negative  existential construc-
tions, negation takes scope over the restrictor of the existential quantifica-
tion, rather than over the nuclear scope). This construction is superfically 
parallel to non-verbal a’ti’  negation: 

 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

157 

 

154.  Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap 
          no       who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes 
          “No student ate potatoes” 
 
Here, there are a number of parallels with  a’ti’  negation of nonverbal 
constituents:  -dya’  surfaces  above  the  verb,  suggesting  that  it  is  base-
generated in a surface position above TP. For instance, compare (154) with 
(155): 

 
155.  A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly 
 
neg teacher-dya’ neut-be Mike 
 
“Mike is not a teacher” 
 
Also like the a’ti’ negation construction, as previously noted, there are 
no  doubly-filled  comp  effects  with  negative  existential  constructions: 
-
dya’ is obligatory, even when other material precedes tèe’bag.  This can be 
seen in (156) and (157): 

 
156.  Tu tèe’bag xi li’ebr-dya’  ny-ùall? 
who no what book-dya’  subj-read 
 
 
“Who didn’t read any book?” 
 
157.  Tu a’ti’ me’s -dya’  n-àa? 
 
 
 
These data suggest that the derivation of non-verbal a’ti’ negation and 
negative existential constructions are identical. However, I will show that 
they differ in a few significant ways.   

who neg teacher-dya’ neut-be 
“Who isn’t a teacher?” 

I  assume that, as in the negative indefinite construction,  tèe’bag is a 
quantifier that takes as its complement a covert existential predicate, which 
in turn takes a lexical VP and its arguments as its complement. The wh-
indefinite takes the negated lexical NP as its complement. Thus, (154) will 
originate as the structure in (158): 

  

 

158   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

158.  Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap 
          no       who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes 
        “No student ate potatoes” 
 

 

QP

Q’

 Q 

tèe’bag
neg

VP

V
E

V’

VPasp

V’

VPcaus

DP

V’

V
b

perf.

tu studya’aann
who student

V

VP

DPi

pap
potato

V’

V
-da’uh
eat

This structure, like the negative existential structure, is monoclausal. 

Any non-negated arguments in these structures raise to their respective 

agreement projections: 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

159 

159. 

AgrOP

DPi AgrO’

pap
potato

AgrO QP

Q’

VP

Q
tèe’ bag

V’

V   VPasp
E

V’

VPcaus

V
b-
perf. DP

tu studya’ aann
who student 

V’

V

VP

ti

V’

V
 −da’uh

eat

The wh-indefinite and its lexical complement likewise raise out of the 
lexical VP.  Here, however,  there is a slight difference from the negative 
indefinite construction: the tèe’bag complex does not raise through VPasp. 
This movement is needed for semantic reasons in negative indefinite con-
structions  (it  marks  the  wh-indefinite  as  a  variable  associated  with  the 
event denoted by the VP). However, in negative existential constructions, 
the  negated  constituent  moves  into  NegP2  independently  of  the  VP  in 
which it is generated, and negation takes scope only over the DP/NP ar-
gument, rather than over the event.  Thus, it raises directly into the speci-
fier of the covert existential VP: 

 
 

 

 

160   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

   160. 
   

AgrOP

DPi

AgrO’

pap

potato

AgrO

QP

Q

tèe’bag

Q’

DPj

VP

V’

(cid:1)

tu studya’aann
who student 

V
∃

VPasp

V’

tj

V
b-
perf.

VPcaus

V’

V

VP

ti

V’

V
da’uh
eat

VPasp, which has tense features that need to be checked, raises into TP, 
leaving tèe’bag,  the  negated argument, and the covert existential VP be-
hind. This movement also reflects the fact that the lexical VP and the event 
it represents are not themselves under the scope of negation, and thus does 
not undergo movement to NegP along with tèe’bag: 

 

4.5 Existential Negation

161 

161. 
 
 

 

VPasp

bda’uh
ate

TP

T’

T

AgrSP

AgrS’

AgrS

AgrOP

DP

gueht
tortilla

AgrO’ 

AgrO

QP

Q’

VP

DP

V’

Q

tèe’bag
no

 

 

 
 
The tèe’bag complex then raises into spec, NegP2: 
 
162. 

tu studya’aann
who student 

V
E

t

NegP2

QP

Neg’ 

tèe’bag tu
studya’aann
no who student 

Neg
dya’

TP

VPasp

T’

bda’uh
ate

T

AgrSP

AgrS’ 

AgrS

AgrOP

DP

gueht
tortilla

AgrO’

AgrO

t

 

162   4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 

The QP then raises out of NegP2 to FocP to  satisfy the Focus Criterion 
and avoid a GDCF violation. (In relative clauses, this movement will target 
PredP rather than FocP; PredP is omitted from the tree below for clarity): 

 
163. 

FOcP

QPi

NegP2

tèe’bag tu
studya’aann
no who student 

ti

Neg’

Neg
dya’

TP

VPasp

bda’uh
ate

T’

T

AgrSP

AgrS’ 

AgrS

AgrOP

DP

gueht
tortilla

AgrO’

AgrO

ti

4.6 Summary 

This chapter outlined the syntax and semantics of three of the most com-
mon  negation  constructions  in  SLQZ: clausal  negation  with  the  negative 
marker cë’ity, constituent negation with the negative marker a’ti’, and in-
definite/existential  negation  with  the  negative  marker tèe’bag.  I showed 
that  these  superficially  similar  constructions,  upon  close  examination, 
show a number of structural differences. These differences reveal the exis-
tence of a number of distinct, interacting preverbal functional projections: 
FocP, PredP, two negative phrases, and two topic positions,  which are 
or

dered in the following hierarchy: 
 

 

4.6 Summary 

163 

 
164. 

TopP1

LD topics

FocP

c
ontrasitvely
focused XPs

PredP

on-verbal
n
preds.

TopP2

a

-topics

NegP1

licenses cë’ity

MoodP

modal verbs NegP2

licenses a’ti’
and tèe’ bag

TP

I  also  showed  that  the  co-occurrence  restrictions  between  several  of 
these projections, as well as the relative rarity of structures with more than 
one  preverbal  constituent,  can  be  attributed  to  the  Focus  Criterion:  the  
Focus projection must be overtly filled in all SLQZ sentences. When no 
contrastively focused constituent is present, then either the entire sentence 
or the highest preverbal constituent is required to raise into FocP. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The 

Syntax of Questions  

5.1 Overview 

The negation constructions described in the previous chapter revealed ad-
ditional  information  about  the  contents  and  ordering  of  preverbal  func-
tional projections. In Chapter 4, it was shown that FocP is distinct from the 
preverbal  projection  in  which  nonverbal  predicates  are  licensed,  PredP, 
and  that  two  separate  preverbal  projections,  TopP1  and  TopP2,  exist  for 
topics.   

Wh-  and  yes/no  questions,  constructions  that  both  involve  the  left  
periphery,  reveal evidence for an additional preverbal projection: IntP, a  
projection  directly  above  FocP  in  which  interrogative  elements  –  
wh-words  and  yes/no  question  markers  –  are  licensed.  This  chapter  will 
discuss  the  syntax  and  semantics  of  wh-questions,  then  the  syntax  and  
semantics of yes/no questions. 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 

In  the  previous  chapter,    the  interaction  of  wh-movement  and  negation 
proved  to  be  a  useful  diagnostic  for  the  syntactic  positions  of  the  three  
negation  markers.    In  addition,  the  interaction  of  a’ti’  negation    with  
wh-questions  reveals  that  syntactic  focus  movement  and  wh-movement   
processes widely believed to involve the same projection and same move-
ment across a range of languages (Rizzi 1995 (Italian); Horvath 1986, Kiss 
1988,  1994  and  Kenesei  1993  (Hungarian);  Ouhalla  1997  (Standard  
Arabic)) – are syntactically distinct operations: as shown in the previous 
chapter,  a’ti’  negation  may  occur  in  wh-questions,  but  not  with  focus-
fronting  of  other  other  constituents.  I  show  in  this  chapter  that  wh-  and  
focus movement are different operations involving two separate, but inter-
acting, projections: FocP and IntP.  

 

166      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

At first glance, SLQZ appears to pattern with other languages with focus 
movement in this regard. Both target immediately preverbal positions (1-2) 
and, in most cases, they may not occur simultaneously (3): 

Tu   y-tàa’az Li’eb? 
who irr-beat  Felipe 
“Who will Felipe beat/Who will beat Felipe?” 

*Tu Gye’eihlly  y-tàa’az? 
 who Mike          irr-beat 
“Who will MIKE beat/ who will beat MIKE?” 

 
1.  Gye’eihlly  y-tàa’az Li’eb 
Mike          irr-beat   Felipe 
 
 
“MIKE will beat Felipe/Felipe will beat MIKE” 
 
2. 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
 
Focus fronting also blocks long-distance wh-movement, as seen in (4-5):  
 
4.  Xi    r-ralloh lìu’   [g-a’u Gye’eihlly t ] ? 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 
 
It also affects the range of interpretations of potentially ambiguous wh-

what hab-think-2s.inf irr-eat Mike 
“What do you think Mike will eat?” 

*Xi r-ralloh lìu’   [Gye’eihlly g-a’u t ] ? 
what hab-think-2s.inf Mike         irr-eat 
“What do you think MIKE will eat?” 

words:  

what way    hab-think-2s.inf   irr-arrive   Mike 
“How do you think Mike will arrive?” 
[“By what form of transportation do you think Mike will arrive?”/ 
“What makes you think Mike will arrive?”] 

 
6.  X:a mo’od r-ralloh    lìu’      [y-zëhnny Gye’eihlly]? 
 
 
 
 
 
These two possible readings correspond to two possible base-generated 
positions for the wh-phrase “how”.   It may either originate inside the em-
bedded clause (giving the “what form of transportation” reading), or it may 
originate  inside  the  matrix  clause  (giving  the  “What  makes  you  think” 
reading). 
 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     167 

When the subject of the embedded clause is focus-fronted, however, this 

ambiguity disappears: 

what way   hab-think 2s.inf Mike         irr-arrive  
“How do you think MIKE will arrive?” 
[* “By what form of transportation do you think Mike will arrive”] 
[“What makes you think Mike will arrive?”] 

 
7.  X:a mo’od r-ralloh  lìu’     [Gye’eihlly y-zëhnny ]? 
 
 
 
 
 
In  this  case,  the  only  available  interpretation  is  that  in  which  the  wh-
phrase  “how”  is  base-generated  in  the  matrix  clause,  above  the  focused 
embedded clause subject. 

If  wh-movement  and  focus  movement  target  the  same  position,  as  ar-
gued, then the ungrammaticality of (3) and (5), as well as the interpretive 
contrasts between (6) and (7) can be easily attributed to bounding viola-
tions:  wh-movement  cannot  occur  past  a  filled  wh-licensing  position.  
Patterns  such  as  these,  attested  crosslinguistically,  support  the  view  that 
wh- and focus movement target the same position. 

The  situation,  however,  is  a  bit  more  complex  in  SLQZ.  There  are  a 
number of syntactic contexts in SLQZ in which wh-movement is allowed, 
but focus movement is not. A’ti’ negation is such as case:  while a’ti’ nega-
tion structures disallow focus-fronted constituents,  wh-fronting is allowed. 
This is seen in the following examples:  

Tu a’ti’ studya’aann-dya’ n-àa? 
who neg student-dya’   neut-be 
“Who isn’t a student?” 

*Gye’eihlly a’ti’ studya’aann-dya’ n-àa 
Mike           neg   student-dya’        neut-be 
“MIKE isn’t a student” 

 
8. 
 
 
 
9. 
 
 
 
An additional piece of evidence for separate landing positions for wh- 
and focus movement  comes from the distribution of preverbal constituents 
in sentences whose verbs are marked with the Definite aspect. The Defi-
nite  aspect,  as  noted  in  Chapter  1,  is  primarily  used  to  express  future 
events that the speaker feels sure will occur: thus, future events expressed 
with the Definite aspect have more emphatic assertive force that those ex-
pressed  with  the  Irrealis  aspect,  the  other  aspect  used  to  express  future 
events: 

 

168      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

10.  Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
irr-sell      Mike         car 
 
 
“Mike will sell the car” 
 
11.  S-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr  
 
 
 
  Future  sentences  with  Definite-marked  verbs  also  disallow  preverbal 

def-sell    Mike         car 
“Mike will definitely sell the car” 
 

(focused) arguments: 

 
12.  *Gye’eihlly s-tòo’oh ca’rr 
Mike            def-sell   car 
 
 
“MIKE will definitely sell the car” 
 
Wh-words, however, may appear before Definite-marked verbs: 
 
13.  Tu s-tòo’oh ca’rr? 
 
 
 
In Lee 2005, I argued that  TPs containing Definite verbs obligatorily 
raise through MoodP to Focus: the focus readings thus given to Definite-
marked  TPs  contribute  to  their    characteristically  strong  assertive  force. 
The  fact  that    TP  must  raise  to  spec,  FocP    in  sentences  with  Definite-
marked verbs would account for the ban on focused arguments: since FocP 
is filled, there would be no place for them to land. 

who def-sell car 
“Who will definitely sell the car?” 

If  wh-words  and  focused  constituents  were  licensed  in  the  same  posi-
tion,  then  the  cooccurrence  of  preverbal  wh-words  and  Definite-marked 
verbs is unexplainable: assuming that Definite-marked TPs surface in FocP 
themselves,  then  there  should  be  no  possible  landing  spot  for  fronted  
wh-words. Thus, the only option is to posit separate positions for focused 
constituents and wh-words.  

5.2.1 The Interaction of Focus and Wh: Reasons for  

Co-occurrence Restrictions 

I will thus assume that wh-features and focus features are indeed licensed 
in  separate  projections.  If  wh-words  and  focus  surface  in  different  posi-
tions, however, any operations involved in wh-movement must be able to 
account for both the co-occurrence restrictions between wh-movement and 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     169 

focus-fronting  (described  in  the  previous  chapter),  as  well  as  the  lack  of 
these restrictions in focus negation contexts. 

The possibility that I will propose is that wh-questions have both [+Q] 
features  and  [+foc]  features:  that  is,  wh-expressions  must  pass  through 
both FocP and an interrogative position (IntP) in order to have their fea-
tures checked (irrelevant projections are omitted in the tree below): 

 
14. 

   
IntP

DP

FocP

wh

TP

t

....

 
 If FocP is filled, then wh-expressions may not appear, since there is no 

longer any way for them to have their focus features checked: 

 
15.     

IntP

DP

FocP

*

 

wh

XP

TP

3

....

 
Conversely,  if  wh-expressions  (apart  from  “why”  and  wide-scope 
“how”) appear, they must pass through FocP themselves. Since spec, FocP 
contains the wh-trace, it is unavailable for other constituents. The possibil-
ity of focused constituents with “why” and wide-scope “how”  results from 
a  difference  in  semantic  function  between  these  elements  and  other  
wh-expressions. 

This possibility is supported by both semantic and crosslinguistic typo-

logical considerations. Both types of evidence will be discussed below. 

Semantic evidence for the necessity of focus movement in wh-questions 
comes  from  the  overlapping  semantic  functions  of  wh-expressions  and 
contrastively focused constituents: both serve to single out members of sets 
that  fulfill  a  particular  role.    Rooth  (1985)    defines  focus  as  selecting  an  
individual out of a set of possible candidates that have a particular quality. 
Likewise,  standard  wh-questions  ask  listeners  to  identify  an  individual  

170      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

out of a set of candidates that have certain qualities. (Similar semantic par-
allels between contrastive focus and wh- constructions have been noted by 
Horvath 1986, among others.) The main semantic difference between con-
trastive focus constructions and wh-questions is that the former identify an 
individual out of the set of candidates, while the latter assume that such an 
individual exists, and ask listeners to identify it. I will assume that this dif-
ference is reflected in the syntax in the following way: when a referential 
expression (such as a proper name) moves into FocP, the entity denoted by 
the expression is identified as the unique member of a set of possible can-
didates  having  a  certain  quality.  Wh-expressions,  however,  are  non-
referential. When a wh-word raises into focus, it simply serves to assert the 
existence of an individual within a set of candidates, but does not specifi-
cally identify this individual. When the wh-word raises out of focus into 
the wh-projection, it is thus interpreted as questioning the identity of the 
focused element. 

Suggestive evidence for two separate, interacting projections for wh and 
focus  comes  from  the  typology  of  wh-questions  and  focus  constructions 
crosslinguistically: languages vary in whether they form wh-questions and 
focus constructions through overt syntactic movement (as SLQZ does) or 
by leaving wh-words and focused constituents in situ. Kenesei (1993) out-
lines the following typology of movement strategies for wh-questions and 
focus constructions: 

 

                                    WH-movement 
 
Chinese, Japanese, etc. 
English, etc. 
Hungarian, etc. 

            -                           
 
            +    

 
 

     Focus movement 

+ 

 
 

 - 
     - 
     + 

 

Table  1.  Typology  of  wh-  and  focus  movement  strategies  (from  Kenesei  1993,  
p. 31). 

 
SLQZ clearly falls into the same grouping as languages such as Hungar-
ian. Conspicuously absent from this list, however, are languages with overt 
focus movement but without overt wh-movement: 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     171 

 

 

WH-movement 
?? 
 

   

- 

Focus movement 
 

 + 

Table 2. Unattested wh- and focus movement configuration. 

 
It appears, then, that such languages are unattested.  If the licensing po-
sition for wh-words is distinct from, and above, FocP, this typological gap 
can be accounted for by reasons of economy: focus-movement  can only 
occur overtly when wh-movement does. This is seen in languages such as 
English,  in which overt wh-movement is required, but focus is realized in 
situ:  overt movement through focus is only required by wh-expressions, 
which  have  to  move  in  any  case  to  reach  IntP.  When  wh-features  are 
strong (that is, if they must be checked by overt movement, per Chomsky 
1992, 1995), focus features may also be strong; thus both can be satisfied 
overtly. This is the case in languages such as Hungarian and SLQZ.  When 
wh-features are weak (that is, if their features can be checked without overt 
movement), focus features are also weak: both are satisfied covertly at LF. 
This is the case with languages such as Chinese.   

The hypothetical language that requires overt focus movement but has 
wh-in-situ, however, can be ruled out by the proposal that focus is licensed 
in  a  projection  below  the  interrogative  projection.  If  it  is  the  case    that  
wh-expressions must  check some of their features by movement through 
Focus, then  a language that requires overt focus movement would also re-
quire  wh-expressions  to  raise  overtly  into  FocusP  (irrelevant  projections 
omitted below): 

 
16. 
    
    

    

    
    

IntP

FocP

DP

TP

wh

...t...

 
Thus, languages with overt focus movement also force overt movement 
of wh-expressions, and wh-expressions are thus blocked from appearing in 
their base-generated positions.  If it is indeed the case (as Kenesei’s data 
imply) that no language requires overt movement for expression of focus 

172      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

but  allows  wh-in-situ,  it  provides  strong  suggestive  evidence  for  distinct 
projections for wh-licensing and focus licensing. Positing a single projec-
tion  (and  a  single  set  of  semantic  and  morphological  features)  for  wh-
words and focused expressions would fail to account for the possible range 
of  wh-  and  focus  movement  configurations  crosslinguistically.  Although 
assuming a single wh/focus projection would correctly rule out languages 
with  wh-in-situ  and  overt  focus  movement  (if  wh-movement  and  focus 
movement  are  the  same  process,  there  should  not  be  any  differences  in 
their distribution), it would also wrongly rule out languages such as Eng-
lish,  with  overt  wh-movement  and  covert  focus  movement.  Positing  
separate,  interacting  projections  for  wh-expressions  and  focus  correctly 
predicts the possibility of languages such as English, while ruling out the 
unattested  possibility  of  languages  with  overt  focus  movement  and  only 
wh-in-situ.  

5.2.2  The Syntax of Wh-Questions in SLQZ 

This interaction between FocP and IntP is instantiated in the syntax in the 
following  way:  in  non-negated  wh-questions,  TP  (the  domain  in  which 
most wh-words are generated)  raises into focus itself, fulfilling the Focus 
Criterion and blocking the raising of other constituents into this position 
(non-relevant projections omitted for clarity): 

 
17. 

 

 

IntP

DP

Int’

wh

Int

Foc

P

TP

Foc’

Foc NegP

Neg’

Neg

t

  
Since the raised TP contains either the base-generated wh-word or wh-
trace (in the case of argument wh-questions and VP-modifying adverbial 
wh-questions), movement  of the TP into FocP satisfies the need for wh-
words to have features checked in FocP.  

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     173 

Movement  of  TP  into  FocP  is  independently  suggested  by  Rizzi’s 
(1995) observation that in Italian, an SVO language, focused constituents 
may be fronted to pre-subject position, but wh-expressions may not appear 
directly before subjects: 

 
18.  QUESTO Gianni ti dirà (non quello che pensavi) 
 
 

THIS       Gianni to-you will-say (not that which you-thought) 
“Gianni will say THIS to you” (not what you thought  
(he would say)) 

what thing Gianni to-you will-say 
“What will Gianni say to you?”  (examples from Rizzi 1995, p.16) 

 
19.  *Che cosa Gianni ti dirà? 
 
 
 
Rizzi attributes this asymmetry not to a difference in position between  
IntP  and  FocP  (which  he argues  to  be a  single  projection)  but  to  the  re-
quirement that wh-licensing requires that both the head and specifier of the 
licensing  position  (FocP,  in  his  view)  be  filled.  This  requirement  is  
motivated  by  the  assumption  that,  since  wh-features  of  matrix  clause  
wh-questions are generated inside TP (e.g., by constituents base-generated 
inside TP),  these features must somehow be moved into the projection in 
which  wh-features  are  checked.  Thus,  when  wh-movement  occurs  in  a  
matrix clause, verbs move obligatorily from the head of TP to the head of 
FocP (by I-C movement, in older terms).  

Rizzi’s  hypothesis  accounts  for  the  obligatory  subject-auxiliary  inver-
sion  in  object  wh-questions  in  English,  for  example,  as  well  as  the  un-
grammaticality of the Italian construction in (19): 

 

 
20.  What did Mike buy? 
 
21.  *What Mike did buy? 
 
Rizzi’s analysis can also be updated to account for the fact that TP, not 
an  inflectional  head,  raises  in  wh-questions  in  SLQZ.  Specifically,  since 
the TP raises to the specifier of a projection distinct from the wh-licensing 
position, spec-head agreement can no longer be considered the motivating 
factor for movement. (This is particularly true if the Generalized Doubly 
Filled Comp Filter is assumed to be operative.) Additionally, we need to 
(1)  motivate  TP-raising to FocP and (2) justify wh-movement out of the 
filled specifier of FocP. 

Motivation for both TP-raising and wh-movement out of TP is provided 
by both the Focus Criterion and the need for wh-expressions to check both 

174      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

[+Q]  and  [+foc]  features,  as  previously  proposed.    Argument  wh-
expressions  (as  well  as  adjunct  wh-expressions  expressing  manner/time) 
are generated inside TP.  Thus, TP-raising to FocP moves the TP (where 
wh- and focus features are generated) into the domain in which these fea-
tures  can  be  checked.    This  is  consistent  with  Rizzi’s  (1995)  analysis,  
outlined  above,  for  the  motivation  of  I-to-C  movement  in  Italian  
wh-questions.  I  will  assume  that  the  wh-expression    remains  inside  TP  
until the TP has raised to FocP, then raises out to IntP. 

5.2.3 Wh-Questions that Allow Focus: A Case of Wh-in-Situ    

The preceding account  also explains why xi ni’ih “why”  and the wide-
scope reading of x:a mo’od “how” differ from other wh-expressions in al-
lowing focused constituents to appear between them and the verb, as seen 
in (22) and  (23): 

 
22.  Xi ni’ih        Gye’eihlly b-tàa’z    Li’eb? 
 
what reason   Mike         perf-beat Felipe 
 
“Why did MIKE beat Felipe?” 
 
23.  X:a mo’od Gye’eihlly y-zëinny Ldùu’ah 
 
what way    Mike         irr-arrive Oaxaca 
 
“How can it be that MIKE will arrive in Oaxaca?” 
 
“Why”  and “how”  (with a wide-scope reading) differ from other wh-
words semantically in that they question an entire event, not just its par-
ticipants or the manner of the action involved. For this reason, they have 
traditionally been assumed to be generated as adjuncts to the entire clause, 
rather than generated inside VP. Because why  and (on certain readings) 
how  (crosslinguistically) take scope over the proposition expressed by the 
entire clause, rather than questioning a part of the proposition, I will argue 
that they are base-generated in IntP. 

Assuming this to be correct, then TP-raising to FocP in xi ni’ih   and 
wide-scope x:a mo’od questions is not necessary for the licensing of these 
wh-words: since xi ni’ih  and x:a mo’od  are generated outside TP, there 
are  no  focus  or  wh-features  inside  TP  that  need  to  be  checked  by  TP-
raising to FocP. Thus, TPs in questions with xi ni’ih  and x:a mo’od  do not 
need to raise to FocP for wh-features to be checked, and FocP can be filled 
by other constituents. (I will assume, however, that when no focus-fronted 
constituents appear in xi ni’ih  and x:a mo’od  questions, TP does raise into 
FocP in order to satisfy the Focus Criterion.) 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     175 

If xi ni’ih, “why”  and wide-scope x:a mo’od, “how”  are generated in 
Spec, IntP, this would mean that they do not pass through FocP, and thus 
differ from  other wh-words in  that they do not have focus features that 
need to be checked. Motivation for this possibility comes from the fact that 
“why”  and  “how”    differ  semantically  from  other  wh-words  in  that  they 
question manners, reasons, and amounts, rather than individuals. Szabolcsi 
and Zwarts (1993) argue that while possible answers to wh-questions with 
“what”  and “who” are members of unordered sets of individuals, possible 
answers to questions with “how” and “why” are members of ordered sets. 
Szabolcsi and Zwarts show that this difference is realized in natural lan-
guage  by  the  contrast  in  possible  felicitous  answers  to  questions  with 
what/who and how. First, consider a simple question with “what”: 

 
24.  What did everyone read? 
 
If the person answering the question knew that there were three people 
in the contextually relevant group “everyone”, and also knew that each of 
them  read  three  books,  he  or  she  could  answer  the  question  one  of  two 
ways,  depending  on  whether  “everyone”  is  interpreted  as  scoping  over 
“what”.  If  “everyone”  takes  wide  scope  (“for  every  person,  what  did 
he/she read?”) the question can be answered with a list of every book that 
every person read (that is, nine books). If “what” takes wide scope (“what 
thing is  such that everyone read it?”) then the question must be answered 
with only the name of the book or books that were on everyone’s reading 
list. In short, to correctly answer the question on this second reading, the 
speaker  must  compute  the  intersection  of  the  reading  lists  of  all  three  
people,  then  pick  out  and  identify  the  individual  item  or  items  in  this  
intersection. 

This  can  be  contrasted  with  the  possible  answers  to  a  question  with 

“how”: 

 
25.  How did everyone behave? 
 
Szabolcsi  and  Zwarts  present  the  following  context  for  this  question:  
the  listener  answering  the  question  knows  that  Bill  behaved  rudely  and 
stupidly, Mary behaved loudly and stupidly, and John behaved nicely and 
stupidly.  In  this  case,  in  contrast  to  (24)  above,  they  argue  that  the  only  
felicitous answer to the  question is the sum of everyone’s behavior: the 
speaker cannot answer the question simply by saying “Stupidly”. In short, 
manners form collective groups that cannot be broken up by the formation 
of intersections, as can groups of individuals. 

176      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

In  short,  allowable  “how”  and  “why”  questions  differ  from  other  
wh-questions in that they do not ask the listener to pick out an individual 
member  of  a  presupposed  set,  but  to  identify  a  collective  group  of  
behaviors.  

This difference can be directly linked to the different roles Focus plays 
in the formation of “how” and “why” questions and other wh-questions in 
SLQZ. Recall that constituents raised into FocP are identified as uniquely 
selected  members  of  sets  of  possible  candidates.  Thus,  focused  constitu-
ents  are  individuals  that  can  be  picked  out  of  groups.  If  Szabolcsi  and 
Zwarts  are  correct,  then  manners  and  reasons  (among  other  things  that 
“how”  and  “why”  normally  represent)  cannot  be  individual  members  of 
sets,  and  thus  cannot  be  identified  as  such  by  being  moved  into  FocP. 
Thus, there is no motivation for “how” and “why” to raise through FocP in 
SLQZ. 

5.2.4 Another Possible Account 

In  the  preceding  sections,  I  have  argued  that  wh-words  and  focused-
fronted words occupy separate, but interacting projections in SLQZ. This 
proposal  was  motivated  by  the  existence  of  syntactic  constructions  (a’ti’ 
negation and future sentences with Definite-marked verbs) in which focus 
movement in blocked, but wh-movement is allowed. These constructions 
suggested that wh-words occupy a distinct projection above FocP. The ap-
parent cooccurrence restrictions between focused elements and wh-words 
results from the movement of TP into FocP in wh-questions. Adjunct wh-
words with wide-scope readings (such as why and wide-scope how) have 
no  focus  features  and  are  generated  in  spec,  IntP;  thus,  they  allow  other 
elements to appear preverbally in FocP. 

This  difference  in  behavior  between  “why”    and  other  wh-words  has 
also been noted in other languages with syntactic focus movement, such as 
Hungarian. Kiss (1994) notes that in Hungarian, miért  “why”  is the only 
wh-word that may co-occur with focused constituents: 

 
26.  Miért   MARI-t    küldte el János a boltba? 
 
 

why     Mary-acc sent away John the shop-to 
“Why is it MARY who sent John to the shop?” 
 (Hungarian: Kiss 1994, p. 37) 

 
Kiss proposes that in this case, “why” adjoins to a position above FocP, 

which she argues to be the normal landing position for wh-words. 

There  is  reason  to  believe,  however,  this  would  not  work  for  SLQZ. 
Evidence against placing “why”  (and “how” ) in higher surface positions 

 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     177 

than other wh-words in SLQZ comes from their behavior in left-dislocated 
topic constructions. Left-dislocated topics are the only nominals that may 
appear before wh-words in SLQZ: 

Mike-top        who perf-hit     Mike 
“What about Mike, who did he hit?” 

 
27.  Gye’eihlly-àa’ tu   gw-àa’zy Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
Furthermore, no material may intervene between topicalized arguments 
and  wh-words in SLQZ. While certain temporal adverbials may be base-
generated above wh-words (28), they may not appear between a topical-
ized argument and wh-word (29): 

yesterday what perf-kill Mike 
“Yesterday, what did Mike kill?” 

 
28.  Nài          xi      b-guhty Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
29.  *Gye’eihlly nài           xi     b-guhty Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
This suggests that there are no possible landing positions (and thus, no 

Mike            yesterday what perf-kill Mike 
“As for Mike, yesterday, what did he kill?” 

additional projections) between TopP and IntP. 

If  it  were  the  case  that  “why”  and  wide-scope  “how”  surfaced  higher 
than other wh-words, one would expect that they would be blocked from 
appearing  with  topicalized  arguments,  since  TopP  is  the  only  remaining 
projection above IntP. This however, proves not to be the case:    

Felipe-top what reason perf-hit-3s.prox Mike 
“What about Felipe, why did he hit Mike?” 

 
30.  Li’eb-àa’   xi    ni’ih   gw-àa’z-ëng     Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
The fact  that all wh-words, regardless of their semantic scope or ability 
to cooccur with focused constituents, may appear after fronted topics thus 
suggests that all wh-words surface in the same position in SLQZ. 

Furthermore, the interpretive constraints on Hungarian “why” questions 
with focus suggest that my analysis is amenable to the Hungarian data as 
well.  

Kiss  notes  that    “why”  in  questions  with  focused  constituents  is  more 
constrained  in  its  possible  interpretation  than  it  is  in  other  contexts.  
 
 

178      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

Normally, Kiss notes, miért   “why” may have the reading “what for” in 
questions: 

 
31.  Miért  küldte el János  Mari-t a boltba? 
 
 

why   sent away John Mary-acc the shop-to 
“Why did John send Mary to the shop?”  
(Hungarian: Kiss 1994, p. 37) 

 
This  question  may  be  felicitously  answered  with  a  reason  (“Because 
Mary  was  hungry”)  or  with  the  item  John  wanted  Mary  to  buy  (“For 
bread”). 

In  the  question  with  “Mary”  in  focus,  however,  the  second  answer  is 
impossible. The question may only be answered with the reason for Mary 
sending John to the shop: 

 
32.  Miért   MARI-t küldte el János a boltba? 
 
 

why    Mary-acc sent away John the shop-to 
“Why is it MARY who sent John to the shop?” 
 (Hungarian: Kiss 1994, p. 37) 

*Kenyér-ért. 
bread-for 
“For bread” 

because Mary hungry was 
“Because Mary was hungry” 

 
A.  Mert Mari éhes volt. 
 
 
 
A. 
 
 
 
This absence of the “what for” reading of “why” in questions with overt 
focus—and its possibility in “why” questions without focus—can be corre-
lated to the presence or absence of [+foc] features on “why”. Recall  that 
the focus feature on wh-words forces wh-words to select an individual out 
of a set of possible candidates. Certain kinds of questions (such as those 
involving reasons and manners), however, cannot have individual elements 
of sets as answers, only collectives of ordered sets.  

The  “for  what  reason”  reading  of  “why”  clearly  falls  into  the  latter 
group: on the “for what reason” reading, a question such as “Why did eve-
ryone leave?”, for instance, can only be felicitously answered with a com-
plete inventory of reasons why all the people involved left: if five people 
abruptly left a party, for example, the above question couldn’t be answered 
with simply the reason why one of the people left. Because the “for what 

5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection     179 

reason” reading of “why” does not involve selecting an individual out of a 
group, it does not involve focus. 

The “what for” reading, on the other hand, does involve selection of an 
individual (the thing desired in (31)) out of a group of possibilities. Thus, it 
is compatible with the function of Focus, and “why” in questions such as 
(31) (with the “what for” reading) must contain [+foc] features itself. 

5.2.5 Two Problem Cases: Narrow-Scope “How” and Focus 

Negation 

This leaves two cases still unaccounted for: why “how” on its manner in-
terpretation  still  shows  co-occurrence  restrictions  with  focused  constitu-
ents, and why a’ti’ negation allows wh-extractions. Below, I will address 
each of these cases in turn. 

Narrow-Scope “How” 
X:a  mo’od    “how”    on  its  manner  interpretation  is  still  sensitive  to  the 
presence  of  other  focused  constituents,  as  seen  in  (33),  repeated  from 
above: 

 
33.  X:a   mo’od r-ralloh    lìu’        [Gye’eihlly  yzëhnny ]? 
 
what way     hab-think  2s.inf      Mike           irr-arrive 
“How do you think MIKE will arrive?” 
 
[e.g., “What makes you think MIKE will arrive?”/  
 
*”By what form of transportation do you think  
MIKE will arrive?”] 

 
The  main  difference  here  is  that  x:a  mo’od  questions  not  an  entire 
proposition, but only the manner in which an event is to take place. On its 
manner interpretation then, x:a mo’od  is most likely generated within VP, 
which represents the action being questioned. 

I will assume that in this case, x:a mo’od raises up through the matrix 
TP along with the VP in which it is generated. Once the xa mood-VP com-
plex  has  raised  into  spec,  TP,  one  of  two  possible  movements  may  take 
place: either the entire TP, containing the x:a mo’od-VP complex,  raises 
up into IntP (perhaps through FocP) or the TP  raises into FocP before x:a 
mo’od raises itself in IntP. Movement through FocP in either of these cases 
may be motivated by the Focus Criterion. 

180      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

Wh-Extraction out of  a’ti’  Constructions 

The final matter that needs to be accounted for is why wh-questions can 

co-occur with a’ti’  negation, as seen in (34): 

 
34.  Tu a’ti’  studya’aann-dya’ n-àa? 
 
who neg student-dya’       neut-be 
 
“Who isn’t a student?” 
 
This is all the more surprising since negation is known to create, rather 
than erase, barriers to wh-movement and other A’-movement (Rizzi 1990, 
Szabolcsi  and  Zwarts  1993).  In  Rizzi’s  terms,  the  common  inability  of  
wh-words to move across negation in a number of languages can be con-
sidered  a  result  of  Relativized  Minimality:  an  A’  specifier,  such  as  a  
wh-word,    cannot  raise  past  an  intervening  A’  specifier,  such  as  an  
operator  in  the  specifier  of  NegP.1  Rizzi  argued  that  this  requirement  is 
motivated  by  the  need  for  wh-traces  to  be  properly  governed  by  their  
antecedents: if a wh-word A raised past another wh-word B, then the trace 
of A would be wrongly governed by B, which would be closer potential 
governor than A: 

 
35.  * wh-A ......wh-B.....tA 
 
This accounts for well-known superiority effects, such as the ungram-

maticality of questions such as *What did who see?  

Rizzi argues that any A’ constituent, such as a negative operator, that in-
tervenes between a wh-word and its trace would result in a grammaticality 
violation. On the other hand, wh-movement past  specifiers in A-positions 
(such  as  subjects)  is  allowed,  since  A-constituents  aren’t  potential  
governors for A’-traces. Thus, while *what did who see? is ungrammati-
cal, what did Bill see? is fully acceptable. 

However,  as  seen  by  the  SLQZ  data,  it  is  precisely  the  illicit  
configuration that appears to be allowed (wh-movement  past a’ti’ nega-
tion),  while  wh-movement  past  an  A-constituent  (a  fronted  nonverbal 
predicate) is disallowed. 

The solution I will assume is that wh-words themselves adjoin to a’ti’   
and  thus,  along  with  a’ti’  and  the  constituent  it  negates,  raise  to  spec, 
FocP: 

                                                      
1 Recall from the previous chapter, however, that in SLQZ NegP2 can also behave 
like a derived A-position when a constituent undergoing A-movement moves 
into it. 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   181 

36. 

          

Focp

 

Qp

Foc’

DP

Q’

Foc

PredP

wh

Q
a’ti’

…tWH

 
  
Since  specifiers  of  specifiers  (such  as  the  wh-word  adjoined  to  a’ti’, 
which itself is the specifier of a larger QP taking the negated constituent as 
its complement) may c-command constituents outside the projections they 
are specifiers of, wh-words adjoined to a’ti’ can govern their traces. 

From Spec, QP, the wh-word then raises to spec, IntP to check its inter-

rogative features and avoid a GDFC violation. 

Thus,  the  A’  status  of  a’ti’  actually  facilitates  extraction  of  wh-words 

because it allows wh-words to pied-pipe with a’ti’  to spec, FocP.  

Predicate  nominals  disallow  wh-words  from  adjoining  to  them  and  
raising with them into FocP: because wh-words are A’–constituents, they 
cannot  land  in  intermediate  A  positions  such  as  PredP  without  forming  
improper chains. Thus, they cannot raise through PredP to FocP along with 
nonverbal predicates.  

Subsequent  movement  of  nonverbal  predicates  from  PredP  to  FocP  to 
satisfy the Focus Criterion, however,  also prevents wh-words from raising 
independently past fronted nonverbal predicates into IntP. Because FocP is 
already filled with the fronted predicate, the wh-word cannot pass through 
FocP itself to have its focus features checked, and wh-movement is thus 
blocked. 

5.3  The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 

SLQZ    forms  yes/no  questions  by  marking  a  sentence  with  one  of  three 
distinct question markers: laàa’, and uu, which  appear question-initially; 
and èee, which appears question-finally. Only one of these  markers  may 
appear per question, as seen in the following examples: 

 

182      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

perf-eat  Mike        tortilla Q 
“Did Mike eat tortillas?” 

37.  B-da’uh Gye’eihlly gueht èee? 
 
 
 
38.  Laàa’ b-da’uh Gye’eihlly gueht? 
Q       perf-eat  Mike        tortilla 
 
 
“Did Mike eat tortillas?” 
 
39.  Uu   b-da’uh Gye’eihlly gueht? 
Q     perf-eat  Mike        tortilla 
 
 
“Did Mike eat tortillas?” 
 
 
While the same English translation may be used felicitously for all three 
of the preceding examples, these three markers differ both in their syntac-
tic and semantic distribution:  the marker uu  can only be used in questions 
for which the speaker expects or wants a positive answer; the marker laàa’ 
may only be used to question a proposition  introduced into the discourse 
by the question itself  (that is, it may only question new information); and 
the marker èee  may only be used to question previously introduced infor-
mation  or  presupposed  information.  In  the  following  sections,  I  will  de-
scribe the syntactic differences among questions formed with the different 
markers,  then  differences  in  their  usage,  and  finally,  the  correlation  be-
tween their syntactic and semantic features. 

5.3.1 Syntactic Differences Among the Question Markers 

Constraints on uu  Questions 
Questions formed with the marker uu (a typical example is given in (40)) 
are  subject  to  the  largest  number  of  syntactic  constraints  of  the  yes/no 
questions. Uu may not be used in questions containing preverbal topics or 
focused constituents (41-42), nor may it be used in negative yes/no ques-
tions (43):  

 
40.  Uu b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 

Q  perf-dance Mike 
“Did Mike dance?” 
 

 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   183 

   Q    Mike          perf-dance  
   “Did MIKE dance?” 

41.  * Uu a    Gye’eihlly b-gya’a’?  
   Q   top Mike        perf-dance  
 
 
   “Did Mike dance?” 
 
42.  * Uu  Gye’eihlly b-gya’a’? 
 
 
 
43.  *Uu cë’ity b-gyàa’-dya’    Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
Questions with uu  may contain postverbal, but not preverbal, predicate 

  Q  neg     perf-dance-dya’ Mike 
“Didn’t Mike dance?” 
 

nominals: 

Q  neut-be Mike         doctor 
“Is Mike a doctor?” 

 
44.  Uu n-àa     Gye’eihlly do’ctoor? 
 
 
 
45.  *Uu do’ctoor  n-àa     Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
Questions about future events may appear with Definite-marked verbs, 
but not Irrealis-marked verbs, in uu questions. (The Definite aspect is used 
to express emphatic speaker belief that a future event will take place; the 
Irrealis aspect, more commonly used, does not): 

   Q  doctor      neut-be Mike 

Q  def-sell Mike          car 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

 
46.  Uu s-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr? 
 
 
 
47.  *Uu  y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
   Q   irr-sell   Mike         car 
 
 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 
 

Constraints on laàa’  Questions 
Questions formed with the question marker laàa’   (a typical example ap-
pears in  (48)) show  fewer syntactic constraints that those with uu.  While, 
like uu questions, they can’t appear with topics (49), unlike uu questions, 

184      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

they may appear with focus-fronted constituents (50) and in negative ques-
tions (51): 

Q       perf-dance Mike 
“Did Mike dance?” 

 
48.  Laàa’ b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
49.  *Laàa’ a   Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah ? 
  Q       top Mike         perf-dance  
 
  “Did Mike dance?” 
 
 
 
   Laàa’  Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah ? 
50. 
    Q       Mike          perf-dance  
 
 
  “Did MIKE  dance?” 
 
51. 
 
 
 
They  may  also  appear  with  preverbal,  as  well  as  postverbal  predicate 

 Laàa’  cë’ity b-gyàa’-(dya’)    Gye’eihlly? 
  Q       neg     perf-dance-(dya’) Mike 
“Didn’t Mike dance?” 

nominals: 

Q      doctor       neut-be Mike 
“Is Mike a doctor?” 

 
52.  Laàa’ do’ctoor  nàa      Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
The fact that the question marker laàa may co-occur with focus-fronted 
constituents (as seen in (50) further supports the existence of separate pro-
jections for interrrogative and focused constituents.  

Unlike uu, they may form future questions with either Irrealis or Defi-

nite-marked verbs: 

 Laàa’ s-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr? 
Q        def-sell Mike         car 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

 
53. 
 
 
 
54.  Laàa’  y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 

   Q    irr-sell   Mike          car 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   185 

This contrast will be shown to be directly correlated to the differing se-

mantics of uu and laàa  questions. 

Constraints on èee  Questions 
Questions  formed  with  the  marker  èee  show  the  fewest  syntactic  con-
straints of the three question types. They can appear with topics (55), focus 
(56), negation (57), and preverbal and postverbal predicate nominals (58): 

 top Mike perf-dance  Q    
“Did Mike dance?” 

Mike perf-dance  Q    
“Did MIKE dance?” 
 

 
55.  A   Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah èee? 
 
 
 
56.  Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah èee? 
 
 
 
57.  Cë’ity b-gyàa’-(dya’) Gye’eihlly èee? 
 
 
 
58.  Do’ctoor  n-àa Gye’eihlly èee? 
 
 
 
Like  laàa’  questions,  they  can  appear  with  either  Irrealis  or    Definite 

neg     perf-dance-(dya’) Mike  Q 
“Didn’t Mike dance?” 

doctor neut-be Mike Q   
“Is Mike a doctor?” 

marked verbs in future questions: 

def-sell Mike car Q 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

 
59.  S-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr èee? 
 
 
 
60.  Y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr èee? 
 
 
 
The  structural  differences  among  questions  with  the  three  different 

  irr-sell Mike car Q 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

markers can be summed up as follows: 

 

186      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

Topics 
Focused arguments 
Negation 
Preverbal  predicate 
nominals/ 
adjectives 
Aspects with future  Definite only  Definite or Irrealis  Definite or Irrealis 

laàa’ 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 

èee 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 

uu 
no 
no 
no 
no 

Table 3. Cooccurence restrictions with yes/no question markers. 

5.3.2 Contexts for the Three Question Markers 

Questions formed with the three markers differ in usage, as well as struc-
ture. These differences concern the status of the information being ques-
tioned or speaker presupposition about possible answers to the question. 

Existential Questions 
Questions involving existential constructions clearly  show the contrasting 
usages  of  the  three  question  markers.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  following  
examples,  which  differ  from  each  other  only  in  the  choice  of  question 
marker: 

 

 
61. 
 
 
 
62. 
 
 
 
63. 
 
 

Uu n-u’uh tu         ø-zuu      loongdèe? 
Q  neut-exist who neut-stand outside 
“Is anyone outside?” 

Laàa’ n-u’uh tu         ø-zuu      loongdèe? 
Q  neut-exist who neut-stand outside 
“Is anyone outside?” 

N-u’uh tu         ø-zuu      loongdèe èee? 
neut-exist who neut-stand outside   Q 
“Is anyone outside?” 

 
These three questions may not be used interchangeably in SLQZ. Rod-
rigo Garcia, one of my SLQZ consultants, gives the following hypothetical 
scenarios in which each of these may be used: 
 
 

 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   187 

The question with uu would be used in the following context:  Someone 
who is carrying a large load out of a store and expecting someone to be 
available to help him or her  would pose the question with uu. This sug-
gests  that  the  question  marker  uu    would  be  used  in  cases  in  which  the 
speaker posing the question fully expects someone to be outside.  

A possible context for laàa’  would be as follows: The speaker posing 
the  question  is  robbing  a  house,    and  wants  to  make  sure  he  or  she  can  
escape undetected. The speaker would then pose the question with laàa’  
to his or her accomplice. (Garcia notes that the question marker uu  could 
not be used in this context.)  The question marker laàa’  is thus being used 
to raise the possibility that someone might be outside.  

Finally,  the  question  with  èee  would  be  used  in  this  situation:  The 
speaker and an accomplice are robbing a house, and as they are about to 
leave, the accomplice  says “Don’t go outside!”. The speaker would then 
pose the question with èee . Garcia notes that neither laàa’  nor uu  may be 
used to pose the question in this context.  

The Uses of  laàa’  and èee    
While uu questions are clearly distinct from the other two types of ques-
tions in both structure and usage, the difference between the contexts for 
laàa’  and èee  is subtle. The only obvious difference is that in the laàa’ 
question, the speaker poses the question without direct prompting, and in 
the  èee    question,  the  speaker  poses  the  question  in  direct  response  to 
someone else’s comments.   

This distinction holds in other questions as well, as the following exam-

ples show: 

Q   neut-exist who doctor neut-exist here 
“Are there any doctors here?” 

 
64.  Laàa’ n-u’uh tu do’ctoor n-u’uh rèe? 
 
 
 
65.  N-u’uh tu do’ctoor n-u’uh rèe èee? 
 
 
 
Garcia offers the following context for the laàa’ question: while walk-
ing down the street, the speaker sees someone being injured in an accident. 
He or she then goes from building to building, asking if there are any doc-
tors available.  

eut-exist who doctor neut-exist here Q 
“Are there any doctors here?” 

He offers  a contrasting context for the  èee question: the speaker wit-
nesses an accident, and another bystander tells him or her to go to a nearby 

188      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

building to find a doctor. The speaker could then use the question with èee 
to ask the other bystander to confirm that there are indeed doctors in that 
particular building. In this case, the question cannot be posed with laàa’ . 

The distinction between (62) and (63) is similar to that between (64) and 
(65): the question with laàa’ is posed without input from other speakers, 
while the question with èee is posed in response to information provided to 
the speaker. This suggests that the choice between èee  or laàa’ depends 
on  the  information  structure  of  the  question:  while  questions  with  laàa’  
appear to be used to simultaneously introduce a proposition into the dis-
course and question it,  questions with èee  are only used to question pre-
viously introduced or presupposed information. In short, laàa’ is used to 
question new information, while èee is used to question old information. 

More Evidence: Negative Questions 
This  generalization  is  confirmed  in  the  contrasting  contexts  for  negative 
yes/no question with laàa’  and  èee : 

  Q      neg doctor    neut-be Mike 
“Isn’t Mike a doctor?” 

 
66.  Laàa’  a’ti do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
67.  A’ti do’ctoor n-àa      Gye’eihlly èee? 
 
 
 
Garcia offers this context for the laàa’  question: Mike is sick, and the 
speaker wants to try to cure him with a potentially dangerous experimental 
medicine.  First,  however,  the  speaker  wants  to  make  sure  Mike  is  not  a 
doctor so that he won’t be aware of what is being done to him.  

 neg doctor    neut-be  Mike Q 
“Isn’t Mike a doctor?” 

Here,  then,  the  speaker  is  simultaneously  raising  the  possibility  that 
Mike isn’t a doctor and asking that this be confirmed or denied. The ques-
tion marker  èee could not be used to form the question in this context. 

A felicitous context for the èee  question is as follows: The speaker last 
saw Mike several years earlier, when Mike was in medical school. Now, a 
mutual acquaintance tells the speaker that Mike is now a lawyer. Here, the 
speaker would use the question with èee  to confirm this newly received 
information: rather than raising the possibility that Mike isn’t a doctor,  the 
speaker is questioning someone else’s assertion that Mike is not a doctor. 

These contexts are thus consistent with the earlier generalization: laàa 
introduces and questions new information, while èee questions old infor-
mation. 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   189 

Another contrast between (66) and (67) is a difference in the scope of 
negation: (66), the question with laàa’ , can be more appropriately glossed 
“Is Mike not a doctor?” 

Q   neg intelligent neut-be Mike 
“Isn’t Mike intelligent?” 

A similar contrast appears in another pair of negative examples: 
 
68.  Laàa’ a’ti nnsini’cy n-àa Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
69.  A’ti nnsini’cy n-àa Gye’eihlly èee? 
 
 
 
The laàa’ question would be used in a context such as this: The speaker 
wants to play a trick on Mike, and is trying to make sure Mike isn’t smart 
enough to catch on.  

neg intelligent neut-be Mike Q 
“Isn’t  Mike intelligent?” 

As in the previous set of examples, the laàa’  question simultaneously 

raises the possibility that Mike isn’t intelligent and questions it. 

A  possible  context  for  the  èee    question  would  be  the  following:  The 
speaker found out that Mike had unexpectedly failed an easy test at school. 
The  speaker,  who  had  previously  assumed  that  Mike  was  intelligent,  is 
now questioning the possibility (raised by the news of Mike’s flunking the 
test) that Mike is not intelligent. Garcia notes that the question with laàa’  
cannot be  used here. 

There are also contexts in which a question may be felicitously poised 
with laàa’, but not èee.  Garcia volunteers the following context; You are 
walking down the street with a friend and pass by an interesting-looking 
restaurant. You then ask your friend if he or she is hungry. In this context, 
“are you hungry?” can only be asked with laàa’: 

Q hab-be.hungry-2s.inf 
“Are you hungry?” 

 
70.  Laàa’  r-dyaàa’n-u’? 
 
 
 
71.  #R-dyaàa’n-u’ èee? 
 
 
 
Garcia volunteers that the question with èee,  while  not allowed in the 
context  above,  would  be  used  if  your  friend  said  he/she  wanted  to  eat 
something before you asked the question.  

hab-be.hungry-2s.inf Q 
“Are you hungry?” 

190      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

Pamela  Munro  (p.c.)  suggests  that  etiquette  concerns  may  be  another 
factor contributing to the pragmatic contrast between (70) and (71): posing 
the question with laàa’   may be interpreted as merely making an indirect 
suggestion, while posing the question with èee  may be construed as pushy 
or presumptuous (rather like an English speaker in the same context saying 
“You’re hungry, right?”). This idea, if correct, however,  further supports 
the idea that laàa’  and èee are distinguished by the status of the informa-
tion they question: questioning the possibility that a friend might be hun-
gry is less forceful that questioning a preformed assumption that he or she 
is hungry. 

Some Ambiguous Cases 
It must be noted, however, that the  propositions questioned in èee  ques-
tions are not necessarily explicitly introduced before the question is asked. 
In the negative cases above, for instance, no one explicitly tells the speaker 
that Mike is not a doctor or that Mike is not intelligent. Rather, these facts 
are inferred from other propositions: the fact that Mike is a lawyer and the 
fact that Mike flunked an easy test. Thus, propositions questioned in èee   
questions may be (technically) new information in that the speaker is the 
first one to introduce it directly into the discourse, but they must be propo-
sitions  that  can  be  inferred  or  presupposed  from  previously  introduced  
information. 

Thus, the line between  contexts for èee  and laàa’ questions is poten-
tially blurry. Indeed, there are contexts that may legitimately trigger ques-
tions with either èee  or laàa’.  

One such context is the following: You are walking down the street with 
someone and you see Mike wearing a white coat and a stethoscope around 
his neck. You ask your companion “Is Mike a doctor?” Garcia notes that 
the question can be posed in either of the following ways: 

Q        doctor    neut-be   Mike 
“Is Mike a doctor?” 

 
72.  Laàa’ do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
73.  Do’ctoor n-àa      Gye’eihlly èee? 
 
 
 
Another potentially ambiguous context is this: You haven’t seen Mike 
in a week. He then appears looking thinner and paler than before. You ask 

doctor     neut-be   Mike Q 
“Is Mike a doctor?” 

 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   191 

a mutual friend who’s with you, “Has Mike been sick?”.  In this context, 
the question may be posed with either laàa’ or èee : 

Q      hab-be.sick Mike 
“Has Mike been sick?” 

 R-a’cxùu Gye’eihlly èee? 
hab-be.sick Mike Q 
“Has Mike been sick?” 

 
74.  Laàa’ r-a’cxùu Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
75. 
 
 
 
These  contexts  meet  the  criteria  previously  established  for  both  laàa’  
and èee  questions. Like other laàa’  questions, the questions in the con-
texts above both introduce a proposition and question its truth. Like  èee  
questions,  however,  the  questions  introduce  propositions  that  can  be  in-
ferred by both speakers and hearers through  real-world knowledge. 
 

Contexts for uu  Questions 
Now I return to the third question marker, uu. Questions with uu are used 
when the speaker either expects or wants a positive answer. They cannot 
be used with negative questions, as previously seen: 
 

76.  *Uu a’ti’ do’ctoor-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly? 
  Q   NEG  doctor-dya’  neut-be     Mike 
 
 
“Isn’t Mike a doctor?” 
 
They are generally used when the speaker wants to confirm a proposi-
tion  he  or  she  believes  to  be  true.  An  example  of  this  appears  in  (77),  
repeated from above: 

 
77.  Uu n-u’uh tu ø-zuu loongdèe? 
 
 
 
As  previously  noted,  this  question  would  be  asked  in  a  situation  in 

Q  neut-exist who neut-stand outside 
“Is anyone outside?” 

which the speaker fully expects someone to be outside. 

Uu questions may also be used in cases in which the speaker does not 
necessarily expect a positive answer, but hopes for one. One such situation 
would be the following: You and a friend are walking down the sttreet and 
see a small child alone and crying, asking for help in Spanish. You don’t 
speak Spanish, so you ask your friend if he does: 

192      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

 
78.  Uu r-gwèe-u’           dihzh Stil? 
 
 
 
In this case, you don’t actually know if your friend speaks Spanish or 

Q  hab-speak-2s.inf word Spanish 
“Do you speak Spanish?” 

not, but you hope he does. 

Similarly, uu may be used in the following context: You see someone 

being injured in an accident and you immediately try to find a doctor: 

 
79.  Uu n-u’uh tu do’ctoor n-u’uh rèe’? 
 
 
 
In this case, the speaker doesn’t have any presuppositions about doctors 

Q  neut-exist who doctor neut-exist here 
“Is there a doctor here?” 

being in the area, only a desire that this be the case. 

What the contexts for uu questions have in common is the speaker’s un-
derlying belief that the proposition questioned is necessarily true–either in 
the actual world (in the cases in which the speaker presupposes a positive 
answer  to  a  question)  or  in  a  set  of  possible  worlds  introducted  by  the 
speaker’s desire that the questioned proposition be true. 

Comparing the Syntax and Semantics of  the Question Markers 
Now I return to the syntactic differences among the three question mark-
ers.  In  this  section,  I  will  account  for  the  syntactic  differences  between 
laàa’ and èee , and how these differences reflect their differing semantics. 
Laàa’  and  èee  differ  syntactically  in  only  two  ways:  their  respective 
sentence-initial  and  sentence-final  positions,    and  their  ability  to  appear 
with topics.   

Why Is èee  Sentence-Final? 
Question  markers  crosslinguistically  are  thought  to  be  generated  high  in 
the tree structure. Assuming this is the case in SLQZ,  under the principles 
of antisymmetry, the sentence-final position of èee  can only be derived by 
obligatory movement of the body of the question past èee.  Thus it is con-
ceivable that laàa’  and èee occupy the same preverbal syntactic position, 
and differ only in the relative position of the rest of the clause: 

 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   193 

          IntP 

80. 
           IntP 
       
 
                Int’ 
             
 
           Int          IP 
      laàa’   
    (Q)
      b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly 
                  (perf.-dance Mike) 
 
 
81. 
       
       
 
 b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly  Int           
(perf.-dance Mike)       èee 
                                      (Q)  
 
This movement gives the correct linear order. However, it also results in 
a violation of the GDCF, since both the specifier and head of IntP are now 
overtly filled. In order to derive a well-formed structure, TP must raise fur-
ther to a projection above IntP.  I assume that this projection is TopP1, the 
projection that houses left-dislocated topics: 

    
   IP                      Int’ 

           

 

 

 

 

 

 
82.  TopP1 
       
                     IntP 
           
          TP                        Int’ 
 
              
 b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly   Int           
(perf.-dance Mike)      èee 
                               (Q)  
                 
This  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  only  elements  that  may  precede 
sentence-initial  question  markers  and  wh-words  are  vocatives  and  left-
dislocated topics: 

Mike       what perf-eat Mike 
“(As for) Mike, what did Mike eat?” 

 
83.  Gye’eihlly xi b-da’uh Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
 
Left-dislocated topics in SLQZ are elements that have already been pre-
viously mentioned and are known to both the speaker and listener. Thus, 
propositions in the LD topic position are interpreted as presupposed or old 

194      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

information. This is consistent with the previously described semantic con-
straints  on èee questions.   

Why Are Topics Disallowed in  laàa  Questions? 
The  second  difference  between  èee    and  laàa  questions  is  that  the  latter 
disallow fronted topics. The fact that laàa  questions allow focus, but dis-
allow  topics,  is  puzzling  in  light  of  the  fact  that  topics  are  lower  than  
focused  constituents  in  SLQZ  (as  seen  in  (87),  where  a  fronted  a-topic 
blocks verb-raising past al, ‘already’: 

Mike     already perf-eat grasshopper 
“MIKE already ate the grasshoppers” 

Mike     perf-eat  already grasshopper 
“MIKE already ate the grasshoppers” 

 
84.  Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady 
 
 
 
85.  Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady 
 
 
 
86.  A Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady 
 
 
 
87.  *A Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady 
 
 
 
There appears to be no syntactic reason why topics may not appear with 
laàa’ questions. This constraint, however, is consistent with the semantic 
requirements of laàa’ questions: they may only serve to question newly in-
troduced  information.  Topics  are  by  definition  old  information,  and  thus 
inconsistent with the subcategorization requirements of laàa’ questions. 

top Mike     perf-eat  already grasshopper 
“Mike already ate the grasshoppers” 

top Mike     already perf-eat grasshopper 
“Mike already ate the grasshoppers” 

The Syntax and Semantics of uu 
Uu  questions differ most markedly from those with other markers. This is 
consistent with its clear difference in usage from the others: its usage is de-
termined by speaker belief about a questioned context, rather than by the 
question’s information status. 

Most  strikingly,  uu  questions  disallow  almost  all  preverbal  structures: 
topics, focused arguments, negation, and preverbal predicate nominals are 
all blocked from uu questions. At first glance, this suggests that uu may be 

5.3  The Syntax of  Yes/No Questions 

   195 

generated in a lower position than the other question markers: if it is gen-
erated below FocP and NegP-1, this would account for the constraints on 
other  preverbal  elements:  there  would  be  no  space  for  them  between  uu 
and the body of the question: 

 
88. 
 

FocP

PredP

NegP-1

XP

uu

TP

Paradoxically, however, uu questions about future events require verbs 
with  the  Definite,  rather  than  Irrealis  aspect,  as  seen  in  the  following  
examples, repeated from above: 

Q  def-sell Mike car 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

 
89.  Uu s-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr? 
 
 
 
90.  *Uu y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 

   Q   irr-sell Mike car 
“Will Mike sell the car?” 

 
As previously shown, verbs with the Definite aspect marker differ from 
other verbs in that they require the propositions they express (and thus the 
TP containing the verb and its arguments) to raise through MoodP to FocP: 
this  accounts  for  both  their  emphatic  readings  and  for  the  fact  that  they 
cannot  co-occur  with  other  focus-fronted  material.  The  fact  that  uu  may 
appear  with  focused  Definite  verbs  suggests  that  uu  is  generated  above 
FocP, in the same position as other question markers. 

The incompatibility of the uu question marker with other preverbal con-
stituents is an indirect reflex of the modal features of uu questions: they 
question propositions the speaker either believes to be true or wants to be 
true.  Thus,  they  introduce  into  the  discourse  a  set  of  possible  worlds  in 
which  the  questioned  proposition  must  necessarily  be  true.  These  modal 
features  are  activated    by  the  movement    of  the  questioned  proposition 
(TP)  through  MoodP,  as  with  the  derivation  of  sentences  with  Definite-

196      5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions 

marked verbs.  MoodP is directly above TP, but below TopP, NegP1 and 
PredP: 

 
91. Uu b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly 
      Q  perf-dance  Mike 
     “Did Mike dance?” 

IntP

uu FocP
(Q)

PredP 

TopP

NegP1

MoodP

 TP

Mood’

 b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly  Mood   t
(perf-dance Mike) 

                               

MoodP then raises to FocP.  Again, this is parallel to the derivation of 

sentences with Definite-marked verbs: 

 
92.  

   
  
   
       
       
       

IntP 

FocP

 uu 
(Q)

 MoodP

PredP

 TP

 Mood’ 

TopP

b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly  Mood
(perf-dance Mike)  

 tTP

 NegP 

tMoodP

 

                                         

Topics, negation, and fronted predicate nominals are licensed in projec-
tions above MoodP, and are thus blocked from appearing under the scope 
of MoodP.  Thus, this structure reflects both the semantic structure of uu 
questions and its syntactic constraints.     

5.4  Conclusion 

   197 

5.4 Conclusion 

This chapter has shown how the syntactic and semantic features of SLQZ 
questions can be accounted for under the ordering of functional projections 
established the previous chapter.  It also showed evidence for the presence 
of IntP, a dedicated projection for the licensing of interrogative elements.  
Also,  a  syntactic  and  semantic  account  was  given  for  the  numerous  co-
occurrence restrictions, noted widely across a range of languages, between 
focus  movement  and  wh-movement.  This  account  showed  that  while 
(most) wh-movement involves focus movement, it also involves additional 
movement through IntP. It also provides a unified explanation for the large 
number  of  cases  in  which  wh-movement  and  focus  can’t  appear  in  the 
same sentence, and the small number of structures in which they can. Fur-
thermore, the existence of IntP is supported by the possible structures of 
yes/no questions in SLQZ: question markers high in the tree may appear in 
sentences  with  focus-fronted  constituents,  suggesting  that  interrogative 
features are checked in a projection distinct from FocP. 
 

 
 

6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San 

Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

6.1 Overview   

SLQZ, like the Zapotec languages generally, expresses temporal functions 
with  verbal  prefixes  that  have  traditionally  been  called  aspect  markers. 
(The forms and uses of these markers are described in detail in Chapter 1, 
and some of the relevant data are repeated below.) In this chapter, I argue, 
counter to traditional assumptions about Zapotec, that a number of these 
markers also encode tense features. This is supported by the differing tem-
poral interpretations of these aspect markers in different syntactic configu-
rations, and by constraints on the interpretation of certain aspect markers 
in matrix clause and embedded contexts. I also show that the syntactically 
driven  constraints  on  the  interpretation  on  verbs  with  different  aspect 
markers    support  recent  proposals    (Enç  1987,  Abusch  1988,  Ogihara 
1989, Stowell 1993, 1995) that tense is sensitive to syntactic scope. Spe-
cifically, the SLQZ data  support Stowell’s (1993, 1995) model of Tense 
as a syntactic predicate, as well as his idea that some morphological tense 
markers  are  not  actual  heads  of  Tense  projections  themselves,  but  rather 
polarity or anti-polarity items sensitive to the presence of tense predicates. 
Evidence for the presence of syntactic tense, as well as for the scope-
sensitive  nature  of  syntactic  tense  in  SLQZ,  comes  from  the  fact  that  
preposed  CP  complements  of  verbs  with  certain  aspect  markers  receive 
different possible tense interpretations than their in-situ counterparts.  The 
clearest cases of this, which will be discussed below, involve clausal com-
plements of Perfective and Habitual verbs. These data show that the Per-
fective  and  Habitual  aspect  markers,  contrary  to  previous  assumptions 
about  Zapotec aspect markers, actually indicate the presence of Past and 
Present tense, as well as aspect. 

 

 

200      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

6.2  “Aspect” Marking in SLQZ 

SLQZ  expresses  tense  and  aspect    by  prefixing  one  of  seven  aspectual 
markers  to  the  verb  stem.    Only  one  aspect  markermay  appear  per  verb 
stem.  I follow longstanding tradition in Zapotec linguistics  and refer to 
these prefixes as “aspect” markers, even though, as I will show, they may 
encode tense and mood as well.   
 
Non-modal aspects 
 
Habitual           
Perfective     
 
 
Progressive      
Neutral           
 

Allomorphs  Modal aspects  Allomorphs 
r- 
b-,w-,m-, gu- 
ca-, cay 
n-, ø- 

Subjunctive        n-,ny- 
Irrealis                ch-, l-, y-, g- 
Definite 
 

z-, s- 
 

 

Table 1. SLQZ aspect markers. 

Six of the seven aspect markers are shown in boldface on the verb stem 

-tàa’z, “to beat”, in Table 2:   
 
Aspect 
habitual 
progressive 
perfective 
irrealis 
subjunctive 
definite 

-tàa’z, “beat” 
rtàa’z 
catàa’z 
btàa’z 
ytàa’z 
ntàa’z 
stàa’z 

Gloss 
“beats (regularly)” 
“is beating” 
“beat” (past) 
“will beat” 
“was going to beat” 
“will definitely beat” 

Table 2. Aspect markers on a verb stem. 

The seventh aspect (the Neutral aspect, realized as the prefix n-  or as a 
zero  prefix)  appears  on  a  small  number  of  verbs  (most,  but  not  all,  of 
which are stative or locational): 

neut-be-3s.prox old 
“He/she is old” 

 
1.  N-àa-ng             banguall. 
 
 
 
2.  X:-nnàaan-a’     n-u’          Sann Luu’c. 
poss-mother-1s  neut-exist San Lucas 
 
 
“My mother is in San Lucas” 
 
(Many of the verbs that allow marking by the Neutral aspect also allow 
marking  by  the  Habitual  aspect.  Habitual  aspect  marking  on  these  verbs  

6.2  “Aspect” Marking in SLQZ 

201 

results in an inchoative, rather than stative, reading of the verb. I will dis-
cuss this in Section 6.2.1.) 

These  prefixes  across the  Zapotec languages have been traditionally 
referred to as “aspect” markers because they are thought to overtly convey 
the  internal  structure  of  events  rather  than  the  temporal  relation  of  the 
event to the speaker. A simple clause with a verb marked with progressive 
aspect, for instance, could be used to express a present, past, or future act 
in progress: 

prog-wait-1s 2s.inf 
“I am/was/will be waiting for you”  

3.  Ca-bee’z-a’ lìu’ 
 
 
 
Similarly, a single Perfective-marked verb can be used to form both past 

and future perfect constructions: 

tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike 
“When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten” 

 
4.  Yzh:ii       chih   y-zëhny-a’  al        b-da’uhw Gye’eihlly. 
 
 
 
Thus, SLQZ (like other Zapotec languages)  has no overt verbal mor-
phology for tense. For this reason, it has been assumed that tense plays nei-
ther an important syntactic nor semantic role in Zapotec grammar (Black 
1994, among others). On closer examination, however, some of the SLQZ 
aspect markers show the same constraints on possible interpretation asso-
ciated with tense markers in overtly tense-marking languages. (Examples 
of standard uses of these aspect markers are given in Chapter 1, and are re-
peated in the following sections as needed.) 

This chapter shows that the Habitual and Perfective markers in particu-
lar indicate the presence of syntactic tense, and show the same scopal sen-
sitivities  to  tense  as  do  the  Present  and  Past  tense  markers  in  English. 
Likewise, the Subjunctive marker shows all the syntactic and semantic fea-
tures  of  Past  tense.  The  Neutral  and  Progressive  markers,  on  the  other 
hand, are indeed purely aspectual, and do not inherently encode any tense 
features of their own. 

The two remaining modal aspect markers, however, show more compli-
cated behavior. The Irrealis marker, which receives either a simple future 
or subjunctive reading depending on syntactic context, appears to encode 
Present tense on its subjunctive reading, but not on its simple future read-
ing, where it encodes Future tense. The Definite marker, which can express 
either  emphatic  future  readings  or  incompleted  events  in  the  immediate 
past, may encode either Present or Past tense, depending on its context. I 
will show that the future reading of Definite-marked verbs results not from 
the  presence  of  Future  tense,  but  from  the  combined  effects  of  Present 
tense and the Definite marker’s aspectual features. 

 
 
 

202      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

 Before discussing these phenomena in detail, I briefly discuss the theo-
retical models of tense and aspect to be assumed in the rest of this chapter. 

6.3 Theoretical Assumptions 

This chapter assumes and shows supporting evidence for Stowell’s  (1993, 
1995)  model  of  tense,  based  on  earlier  work  by  Zagona  (1990),  Enç 
(1987), and Abusch (1988).  While earlier models of tense treat tense as 
having  referential  or  operator-like  properties  (Enç  1987,  Partee  1973, 
among others), Zagona and Stowell treat tense as a predicate. Stowell pro-
poses that tense is the head of a functional projection TP, and  is a dyadic 
predicate taking the utterance time (UT) or other reference time (RT) as its 
external argument, and the event time (ET) as its internal argument. These 
temporal arguments are realized as “Zeit-phrases” (ZPs).  The head of the 
tense  projection  (TENSE)    orders  these  arguments  with  respect  to  one  
another. 

 For instance,  PAST tense is a TP head that orders a reference time of 
an event  (ZP-RT)  after the event time (ZP-ET). (In matrix clauses, this 
external  reference  time  is  generally the  utterance  time.)    ZP-ET,  in  turn, 
contains an operator that c-commands and controls (= assigns a value to) a 
temporal argument in spec, VP. This controlled temporal  argument within 
VP, which Stowell calls PRO-ZP, locates the event denoted by VP within 
this time. 

Thus, in a simple past sentence such as  Mike ate the grasshoppers, the 
RT  (the  present  time)  is  ordered  after  the  ET  (the  time  of  Mike  eating). 
Since  no other temporal arguements syntactically control ZP-RT, it is in-
terpreted as the utterance time (UT) by default. ET, in turn, passes its tem-
poral value to the temporal argument of VP: 

5. 
          

TP

ZP-RT

T’

T

PAST
(after)

ZP-ET

Z’

Z

VP

 

PRO-ZP

(M. eating)

 
 
When ZP-RT is controlled by another temporal argument, T takes this 
time as its external argument, rather than the utterance time. For instance,  
 
 

6.3  Theoretical Assumptions 

203 

in a sentence such as “Tomorrow, Felipe will say Mike ate the grasshop-
pers”, Mike’s eating is interpreted as necessarily preceding the time tomor-
row when Felipe will speak, but need not be interpreted as happening be
fore
 the  present time (when the speaker predicts what Felipe will say). The 
tense structure of this sentence (with other projections omitted for clarity) 
is as follows: 

 
6. 

      
TP

ZP-UT

T’

T

FUTURE
(before)

ZP-ETi (time of saying)

Z’

Z

VP

PRO-ZPi

V’

 

V
say

TP

ZP-RTi

T’

T

ZP-ET (time of eating)

AFTER

                                         
Since TP  appears in both the matrix and embedded clauses, it must be 
the case that there are two separate RTs: the external argument of the ma-
trix clause TP, and the external argument of the embedded clause TP. The 
external argument of the matrix clause (“Tomorrow, Felipe will say...”) is 
the UT. Tense in the matrix clause orders UT before the time of the event 
of “saying”.  

As  seen  in  the  tree  above,  the  external  ZP  argument  of the embedded 
clause TP gets its temporal value from the PRO-ZP argument of the matrix 
clause  verb,  which  takes  the  embedded  TP  as  its  complement.    In  cases 
such as this, in which the external argument  of Tense is a time other than 
UT, Stowell assumes that the argument behaves like controlled PRO. 

Demirdache and Uribe-Extebarria (1997)  (hereafter D&U) expand upon 
Stowell’s model, and incorporate aspect into the tense system. They pro-
pose that  aspect, as well as tense, is a time-denoting predicate  taking two 
time-denoting phrases as arguments. Because aspect denotes time intervals 
within or around an event situated in a particular time, they propose that 
the  aspectual  predicate  is  generated  as    the  complement  of  the  predicate 
TENSE. Thus Stowell’s ET becomes AspP in their analysis: 

 

 

 
 
 

204      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

  
7. 
TP
          
UT

T’

T

AspP

 
Tense takes the reference/utterance time of an event  (UT) as its external 
argument (as in Stowell’s account), and the assertion time (the time inter-
val focused/selected by Aspect) (AST) as its internal argument. 

The  head  of  AspP  (which  I  will  refer  to  as  ASPECT,  consistent  with 
Stowell’s  label  of  TENSE  for  the  head  of  TP)1  takes  the  assertion  time 
(AST) as its external argument, and the time of the event denoted by the 
VP as its internal argument: 

 
8. 
       
UT
    

 
TP

T’

T

AspP

AST

Asp’

Asp

VP

 
In short, the AST is ordered by both Tense and Aspect. 
An example of this can be seen in a simple past progressive expression, 
such  as  “Mike  was  eating  grasshoppers”.  PROGRESSIVE  aspect  is  a 
predicate that orders the AST within the period of time in which an event 
takes place. Thus, AST highlights a point in time during an event in pro-
gress. In  “Mike was eating grasshoppers”, for instance, AST highlights a 
point in time within the period in which Mike is eating, and PAST tense 
orders UT after AST. Thus, AST, the interval of time denoted by “Mike 
was  eating”,    is  ordered  both  inside  the  eating  event  (by  ASPECT)  and  
before UT (by TENSE): 

 

                                                      
1 Likewise, following Stowell, I use initial-capped tense/aspect names (Past, Per-
fective) to refer to the actual tense/aspect markers themselves (such as English 
Past marker -ed and SLQZ Progressive marker ca-). Terms expressed in capi-
tals (e.g. PAST) refer to tense predicates  themselves, while lowercased terms 
(“past”)   are used in all other contexts. 

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

205 

9.     

TP

UT

T’

T

PAST
(after)

AspP

AST

Asp’

 

Asp

PROG.
(within)

VP
(time of Mike eating)

past t1 AST t2 UT future

 
t1=time eating starts, t2=time eating ends, AST=time denoted by “was 

eating”, UT=utterance time. 

 
There are clearly some differences between Stowell’s and D&U’s pro-
posals that need to be reconciled (such as the question of whether the 
ternal ZP argument of Tense is the same as AST or serves some independ-
in
ent semantic purpose). I will return to this issue, along with the question of 
the exact syntactic instantiation of these models in SLQZ.  

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

Now I  address the evidence for tense in SLQZ. One of the aspect markers 
that most clearly  reveals the presence of tense in SLQZ is the Perfective 
marker. For this reason, I will use the behavior of the Perfective marker to 
begin this discussion. I will show that the Perfective marker shows a num-
ber  of  semantic  features  that  have  been  commonly  associated  with  past 
tense, and that the presence of the Perfective marker is a diagnostic for the 
presence of PAST in TP in SLQZ. 

6.4.1 The Distribution of the Perfective Aspect Marker 

To reiterate from Chapter 1, the Perfective marker is most commonly used  
in past, resultative contexts: 

 
10.  B-guhty-a’ bzihny 
 
perf-kill-1s mouse 
“I killed a mouse” 
 

 
 
 

206      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

It  may  also  be  used,  however,    to  express  future  perfectives  (repeated 

from (4)): 

tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike 
“When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten” 

11.  Yzh:ii         chih   y-zëhny-a’     al b-da’uhw  Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
Such  contexts  suggest  that  the  Perfective  marker  in  SLQZ  has  the  
canonical  features  of  Perfective  aspect:  it  denotes  completed  events.  
In  D&U’s  terms,  Perfective  aspect  can  be  defined  as  a  predicate 
PERFECTIVE that orders AST after a completed event: 

 

12. 
         

AspP

AST

Asp’

Asp
PERF
(after)

VP
t1....t2

 
Thus,  the  interval  of  time  denoted  by  AST  in  Perfective  contexts  is  a 

point after the completion of an event. 

When expressing past events, however, the Perfective marker may also 

denote states without explicit endpoints: 

perf-be-3s.prox  heavy 
“He was heavy” 

 
13.  G-uhc-ëng  nnàa’ah 
 
 
 
14.  B-yuall-a’ 
 
 
 
There are no attested cases, however, of Perfective marking being used 

perf-thirsty-1s 
“I was thirsty”      

on verbs expressing future states.  

An apparent exception, however,  is the case of imperatives, which are 

frequently formed with Perfective-marked verbs: 

 
15.  B-ìi’lly! 
perf-sing 
 
 
“Sing!” 
 
I will return to this construction after defining the aspectual features of 
the Perfect marker, and show that this asymmetry results directly from the 
interaction  of  mood  and  aspect,  and  is  consistent  with  the  definition  of 
PERFECTIVE aspect given above. 

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

207 

6.4.2 Embedded Perfective Clauses 

In spite of examples such as (15), Perfective-marked verbs in SLQZ show 
many of the canonical features of Past tense. A context in which these fea-
tures reveal themselves is the interpretation of Perfective-marked verbs in 
embedded-clause constructions. In these constructions, the possible read-
ings  of  embedded  Perfective  clauses  prove  to  be  dependent  on  the  tense 
features of the matrix clause. This dependency suggests that tense, as well 
as aspect, is encoded by the Perfective marker in SLQZ. 
Perfective Under Past-Interpreted Matrix Clauses 
Perfective-marked  verbs  in  complements  of  matrix  verbs  with  past-tense 
interpretations  may  receive  either  simultaneous  or  past-shifted  readings: 
that is, the  embedded clause past event may be construed as either happen-
ing simultaneously with the matrix clause event (the simultaneous reading) 
or before it (the past-shifted reading):2 

 

 
16.  Nài          ø-nnaa   Gye’eihlly     a Li’eb    b-ìi’lly 
 
 

yesterday neut-say Mike         TOP Felipe perf-sing 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe sang”      
[Felipe was singing at time of saying/  
 
Felipe was singing before time of saying] 

 

 

                                     

 
Complements  of  “say”,  however,  are  often  preposed  in  SLQZ.  Non-
preposed complements of “say” are only interpreted as indirect quotations, 
while preposed complements may be, but aren’t necessarily,  interpreted as 
direct quotations: 

neut-say Mike    hab-sick-1s 
“Mikei said Ij am sick” / *“Mike said, ‘I am sick’ ” 

 
17.  Ø-nnaa Gyeeihly  r-ahcx:ùu’w-a’ 
 
 
 
18.  R-ahcx:ùu’w-a’ ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly 
 
 
Preposed  clausal  complements  may  not  co-occur  with  preverbal  argu-
ments or wh-words (other than “why”, which may  co-occur with prever-
bal arguments, as shown in the preceding chapter).  

hab-sick-1s   neut-say Mike 
“Mikei said Ij am sick” / “Mike said, ‘I am sick” 

                                                      
2  nnaa  “say”  is  one  of  a  small  number  of  non-locational/stative  predicates  in 
SLQZ  that  takes  the  Neutral  aspect  marker.  The  Neutral  marker  in  the  sen-
tences  given  here  may  be  interpreted  with  a  past-tense  reading.  To  ensure  a 
nonambigous  temporal  interpretation  of  “say”,  most  of  these  sentences  also  
include temporal adverbs such as “yesterday”. 

 
 
 

208      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

when hab-sick Felipe neut-say Mike 
“When did Mike say Felipe was sick?” 

when neut-say Mike    hab-sick   Felipe 
“When did Mike say Felipe was sick?” 

19.  Guhc ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly r-ahcx:ùu’w  Li’eb? 
 
 
 
20.  *Guhc r-ahcx:ùu’w  Li’eb ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly? 
 
 
In the previous chapter, I showed that  preverbal arguments occupy the 
Focus  projection  FocP,  and  wh-words  occupy  a  separate  projection  that 
nevertheless has strict co-occurence restrictions with filled FocP. The fact 
that  preposed  complements  of  “say”  share  the  same  distributional  con-
straints as focused constituents suggests that they  occupy the specifier of 
FocP. 

When  a  complement  containing  a  Perfective-marked  verb  is  preposed 
from a matrix clause with a past meaning, the possibility of a simultaneous 
reading disappears, and the preposed complement may only receive a past-
shifted reading. That is, the event described in the complement clause can 
only be interpreted as happening before the matrix clause event: 

 

 

                                     

 
21.  A Li’eb       b-ìi’lly       ø-nnaa   Gye’eihlly nài’  
 
 
 

TOP Felipe perf-sing     neut-say Mike       yesterday 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe sang”       
[F. sang before Mike said he did/ 
*Felipe sang at the same time Mike said he did] 

 
This  contrasts  directly  with  (16)  (repeated  below),  in  which  a  non-
preposed  complement  with  a  Perfective  verb  may  receive  either  a  past-
shifted or simultaneous reading: 

 
22.  Nài    ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly     a Li’eb   b-ìi’lly 
 
 

yesterday neut-say Mike TOP Felipe perf-sing 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe sang”     
[Felipe was singing at time of saying/  
 
Felipe was singing before time of saying] 

The contrasting possible interpretations of (21) and (22) show that the 
aspectual morpheme itself can’t be the only factor contributing to temporal 
interpretation:  if  Perfective  marking  encoded only aspectual features, the 
ordering of the clauses should not affect their possible tense interpretation.  
Furthermore,  the  fact  that  there  is  a  clear    correlation  between  syntactic 
structure and possible tense readings suggests that tense is realized as part 
of the syntax. 

The  fact  that  the  simultaneous  reading  of  Perfective  complements  of 
past  matrix  clauses  is  only  possible  when  the  complement  is  not  pre-
posed—that is, when the Perfective complement is below the matrix PAST 

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

209 

clause—also  suggests  that  Tense  is  sensitive  to  scope.  This  is  consistent 
with a number of recent proposals that note the sensitivity of Tense to sco-
pal  factors  in  a  number  of  languages  (Enç  1987,  Abusch  1988,  Ogihara 
1988). In the next section, I will briefly summarize one proposal (Stowell 
1993, 1995) that treats Tense as a purely syntactic phenomenon, and treats 
morphological tense markers as polarity items that need to be in specific 
scopal  relations  with  the  head  of  TP.  I  will  then  show  that  this  model  
accounts for the SLQZ data in (21) and (22) in a principled way. 

Tense Markers as Polarity Items 
Stowell  (1995)  attributes  the  possibility  of  simultaneous  or  past-shifted 
readings for past-under-past constructions to the syntactic and semantic re-
quirements  of  past-tense  markers.  He  proposes  that  morphological  past 
tense  markers  (such  as  English  -ed )  are  not  actual  instantiations  of  the 
PAST tense predicate itself, but are polarity items that need to be licensed 
by    PAST.  He  thus  labels  such  past-tense  markers  Past  Polarity  Items 
(PPIs).  Justification  for  this  treatment  of  past  tense  markers  comes  from 
the fact that their presence does not always translate into an absolute past-
tense  interpretation.  He  cites  the  following  example  (Kamp  and  Rohrer, 
cited in Abusch 1988, p. 19) to show this: 
 

23.  John decided a week ago that in ten days at breakfast  he would 

tell his mother  that they were having their last meal together. 

 
Recall that Stowell defines PAST tense as  a predicate ordering a refer-
ence time after an event time. The past auxiliary “were” in the preceding 
example,  however,  is  problematic  for  this  analysis:  the  event  of  “having 
their last meal together” is neither past with regard to the utterance time, 
nor with the matrix clause event (the time of John’s deciding) nor with the 
embedded clause telling event. Rather, “were” is interpreted as simultane-
ous  with  “next  week”.  “Were”,  then,  cannot  be  the  manifestation  of  a 
PAST tense head itself, but only a reflex of PAST in a preceding clause. 
The  simultaneous  reading  of  embedded  clauses  in  past-under-past  con-
structions has long been problematic for analyses of Tense; previous litera-
ture proposed that the embedded clause was actually PRESENT tense with 
regard  to  the  matrix  past  (Comrie  1985,  1986)  and  that  morphological 
rules forced past-tense morphology to surface on embedded verbs. 

Stowell’s  treatment  of  past  morphological  markers  as  polarity  items, 
however,  accounts  for  both  simultaneous  and  past-shifted  readings  in  a 
principled way. Because Tense is realized as a syntactic head in his model, 
he takes the necessary licensing conditions for PPIs to likewise be syntac-
tic: PPIs must be within the syntactic scope the predicate PAST. Stowell’s 
proposal  does  not  lay  out  specific  syntactic  conditions  for  licensing  of 
PPIs, but a relation of structural superiority of TENSE over PPIs (such as 
c-command) seems to be assumed. 

 
 
 

210      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

In  the  English  example  above,  then,  the  two  possible  readings  for  the 
embedded  clause  result  from  the  presence  of  two  possible  licensers:  the 
head  of  TP  in  the  matrix  clause,  and  the  head  of  TP  in  the  embedded 
clause.  

When the matrix and complement clause events are interpreted as occur-
ring simultaneously, both the matrix and complement clause Past markers 
are licensed by the same head: the  Tense head in the matrix clause, which 
c-commands  both  the  matrix  clause  and  embedded  clause  verbs.  (The 
Tense head in the embedded clause is presumably inactive in these cases.) 
Thus, both the matrix and embedded clause events are interpreted as PAST 
with regard to the same time:  UT. 

In  cases  in  which  the  matrix  and  complement  clause  events  are  inter-
preted as occurring at separate times, the matrix and embedded clause PPIs 
are licensed by separate heads: the Tense heads of their respective clauses. 
The SLQZ Perfective Marker as a Past Polarity Item 
Now I return to the SLQZ data. Stowell’s proposal can easily account for 
the different possible readings of the SLQZ embedded and preposed Per-
fective  clauses  in  (21)    and  (22).  I  assume    that  the  Perfective  marker,  
besides encoding aspectual features, is also a Past Polarity Item (PPI) (fol-
lowing  Stowell  1995)  that  needs  to  appear  under  the  syntactic  scope  of 
PAST tense. In (22) the simultaneous reading of the embedded clause is 
possible because the PPI in the embedded clause can be licensed by PAST 
in  the  matrix  clause.  Thus,  the  matrix  clause  and  embedded  clause  past 
times are the same. 

In (21)  the preposed complement of “say” cannot be licensed by matrix 
clause  PAST  tense  because  it  has  raised  to  a  position  above  the  matrix 
PAST head. Thus, the embedded clause must provide its own PAST tense, 
and  the  times  of  the  matrix  event  (saying)  and  embedded  clause  event 
(singing) have to be different. (22) optionally allows the past-shifted read-
ing by allowing PAST to appear in both the matrix and embedded clauses. 
This  raises  the  question  of  why  preposed  Perfective  complements  of 
past-interpreted clauses must have past-shifted readings, and cannot have 
purely  indexical  past  readings:  that  is,  why  can’t  (21)  be  interpreted  to 
mean that Felipe was singing at some time in the past with regard to the ut-
terance time, but after the matrix clause event time? The same issue arises 
in  English:  an  English  past-under-past  construction  such  as  Mike  said 
Felipe is sick can only have a simultaneous or past-shifted reading; there is 
no  possible  reading  in  which  the  embedded  clause  event  (Felipe’s  sick-
ness) is interpreted in the past, but after the matrix clause event (Mike’s 
saying). 

The  English  past-shifted  case  can  be  accounted  for  as  follows:  since  
the  embedded  clause  remains  under  the  syntactic  scope  of  the  matrix 
clause, the external ZP argument of the embedded clause TP is controlled 
by  the  matrix  clause  ET.  When  PAST  tense  is  present  in  both  the  

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

211 

matrix and embedded clauses, then, the embedded clause event is obligato-
rily ordered in the past with regard to the matrix clause past event. 

The necessity of past-shifted readings with extraposed Perfective com-
plements in SLQZ is  derived in a parallel fashion.  In order for a Perfec-
tive complement to extrapose, it must contain PAST tense itself in order to 
license the presence of the Perfective marker. In its base-generated posi-
tion, then, the external ZP argument of the complement clause TP is con-
trolled by the ET of the past matrix clause event, as in the English case. 
Thus,  in  its  base-generated  position,  the  embedded  Perfective  clause  
receives a past-shifted reading. 

When the clause preposes to the matrix clause Focus position, the exter-
nal ZP argument of the preposed clause TP has no possible binder, and is 
thus  interpreted  as  UT.  Thus,  in  its  preposed  position,  the  complement 
clause event is interpreted as past with regard to UT.  

However, when  complement clauses raise out of the matrix clause, both 
the raised and base-generated copies are interpreted. (Further evidence for 
the obligatory interpretation of both raised and non-raised copies of clausal 
complements comes from the behavior of present-under-past constructions, 
to be discussed below.) The requirement that both copies of the raised Per-
fective  complement  in  sentences  such  as  (21)  be  interpreted  results  in  a 
type of  “double access” reading: the Perfective complement is simultane-
ously interpreted as describing an event that occurred in the past with re-
gard  to  the  matrix  clause  UT    (the  reading  of  the  preposed  copy  of  the 
complement) and in the past with regard to the matrix clause past ET (the 
reading of the base-generated copy of the complement). Since past-shifted 
events are necessarily ordered in the past with regard to a present UT, the 
past-shifted reading results.  
Perfective Under Irrealis Matrix Clauses 
The correlation between syntactic scope and tense interpretation  is further 
supported by the interpretation of Perfective-marked verbs in the comple-
ments  of  verbs  with  Irrealis  aspect  marking.  (Verbs  with  Irrealis  aspect  
receive future interpretations in matrix clauses) : 

tomorrow irr-say Mike perf-sick   Felipe 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe was sick” 

24.  Yzh:ii y-nnìi Gye’eihlly g-uhcx:ùu’w Li’eb 
 
 
Here, Felipe can be interpreted as being sick either before Mike said so 
or, more naturally, before this sentence was uttered.  On the first reading,  
Felipe  may  be  sick  at  UT,  and  the  speaker  expresses  the  possibility  that 
Mike will report today’s event of Felipe’s sickness tomorrow. On the sec-
ond reading, Felipe’s sickness can only be interpreted as already being a 
past event when the sentence is spoken. 

The  possibility  of  these  two  readings,  however,  results  from  the  
interpretive  ambiguities  allowed  by  a  single  structure.  When  Perfective 

 
 
 

212      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

complements of Irrealis verbs surface beneath the matrix clause, the em-
bedded clause RT is controlled by the matrix clause Tense, which thus al-
lows the reading in which the embedded Past event is interpreted as Past 
with respect to a future time. This is shown in the tree below (projections 
for focus, agreement, etc. omitted for clarity): 

25. 

 

TP

UT

T’

T

ZP-ETi

FUTURE

Z’

Z

VP

V’

TP

V
say

ZP-RTi

T’

T

PAST

ZP-ET

Z’

Z

VP

PRO-ZP

V’

V
sick

This  structure  accounts  for  the  two  possible  readings  of (24): the past 
event in the embedded clause is necessarily interpreted as ordered in the 
past with regard to the future matrix clause ET. However, nothing in the 
structure above prevents the embedded clause event from being construed 
as prior to the matrix clause UT: events ordered in the past with regard to 
the matrix clause UT are also, necessarily, ordered in the past with regard 
to the matrix clause future ET, as shown in the timeline below: 

              UT            ET1 

 
_______|________|___|_____|_____ 

26. 
 
                    <-------ET2--> 
 
Thus,  the  embedded  clause  past  event  (ET2)  is  ordered  before  the  
future  matrix  clause  ET    (ET1).  The  ordering  between  ET2  and  UT,  

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

213 

however, is indeterminate; ET2 may precede, follow, or overlap with UT, 
as long as it precedes ET1. Thus, (24) may receive readings in which the 
embedded event is ordered before UT, as well as before the matrix clause 
future ET. 

When a Perfective complement of an Irrealis matrix clause is preposed, 
however,  it  may  only  be  interpreted  as  describing  an  event  occurring  
before the UT: 

 
27.  G-uhcx:ùu’ Li’eb y-nnìi Gye’eihlly yzh:ii 
perf-sick    Felipe irr-say Mike tomoroow 
 
 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe was sick” 
 
This can only mean Mike was sick before UT—that is, Mike’s sickness 

is already a past event at the time the sentence is uttered. 

Like  the  Perfective-under-past  constructions  discussed  in  the  previous 
section,  the  interpretive  constraint  on  preposed  Perfective-under-future  
clauses  is  also  the  result  of  a  double-access  reading.  When  Perfective-
marked  complements  of  Irrealis  verbs  are  overtly  preposed,  the  external 
ZP  argument  of  the  complement  clause  TP  gets  two  separate  interpreta-
tions: it is controlled by the matrix clause future ET in its base-generated 
position  and it is interpreted as UT in its preposed position  (outside the 
scope  of  matrix  clause  tense).  Since  both  the  raised  and  base-generated 
copies of the Perfective complement are interpreted, the past event in the 
complement clause must be simultaneously interpreted as past with regard 
to both the matrix clause ET and matrix clause UT. The only way for both 
conditions to hold true, however, is for the embedded clause past event to 
be ordered before the matrix clause UT: events preceding the matrix clause 
UT  are  necessarily  interpreted  as  past  with  regard  to  the  matrix  clause  
future ET. However, the converse does not hold: as seen in  (26), events 
preceding the matrix clause future ET do not necessarily precede the ma-
trix  clause  UT.  Once  again,  this  constraint  on  temporal  interpretation  is 
unexpected  if  the  Perfective  marker  were  a  reflex    of  aspectual  features 
only. 

More Evidence: Perfective Aspect in Relative Clauses 
SLQZ  Perfective-marked  verbs  show  the  behavior  of  PAST  verbs  in 
overtly tense-marking languages in other contexts as well. One such con-
text is in relative clauses, which allow a different range of possible tempo-
ral interpretations than other complement clauses containing Past tense. 

In English, relative clauses with PAST tense receive only independent 

interpretations when they appear under the scope of another PAST tense: 

 
28 

John saw the man who kissed Sandy.   

 
 
 

214      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Here, both the times of seeing and kissing are interpreted as before the 
utterance  time,  but  are  unordered  with  regard  to  each  other:  that  is,  it  is 
possible for John to have seen the man before he kissed Sandy. This con-
trasts with the possible interpretation of other PAST clauses under PAST 
verbs, which only allow simultaneous and past-shifted readings. 

Stowell argues that the possibility of such unordered tense readings of 
relative clause events points to obligatory extraposition of the DP contain-
ing  the  relative  clause  out  of  the  syntactic  scope  of  matrix  clause  tense 
(specifically, out of the scope of the external temporal argument of VP.). 
He  suggests  that  this  movement  could  actually  be  overt:  perhaps  it  is 
movement of the relative clause DP out of VP to AgrOP (irrelevant projec-
tions omitted below for clarity): 

29. 

 

AspP

    

DP

AgrO’

AgrO

VP

PRO-ZP

V’

V

t

If Perfective aspect marking in SLQZ is a diagnostic for the presence of 
PAST tense, as has been argued in the previous section, SLQZ Perfective 
verbs in relative clauses should behave identically to English PAST rela-
tive clauses when embedded under matrix clause verbs with past interpre-
tations. This prediction is borne out: 

perf-give Ms. Pam    book   student       REL perf-sick 
“Pam gave a book to the student who was sick” 

30.  B-dëidy Lia Pa’amm li’ebr  studya’aann nih g-uhcx:ùuw 
 
 
Here, as in the English example, the events of giving and sickness are 
unordered:  the  student  could  have  become  sick  after  receiving  the  book, 
for instance. 

 

The SLQZ data, then, show clearly that tense as well as aspect are pre-
sent in the syntax and semantics of SLQZ. Furthermore, the difference in 
temporal  interpretation  between  extraposed  and  non-extraposed  comple-
ments of  past-interpreted verbs supports Stowell’s idea that certain mor-
phological  markers  associated  with  tense  need  to  be  within  the  syntactic 
scope of TENSE. 

6.4.3  The Interaction of PAST Tense and Perfective Aspect 

In  the  previous  section,  I  showed  extensive  evidence  that  the  Perfective 
aspect marker in SLQZ is sensitive to the presence of PAST tense.  In this 

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

215 

section,  I  will  discuss  its  aspectual  features  and  their  interaction  with 
Tense, and show that  the asymmetric distribution of telic/atelic predicates 
with  Perfective  marking  under  Past  and  Future  tense  falls  out  naturally 
from the interaction of Tense and Aspect. 

If the preceding analysis is correct, then the Perfective marker is a PPI, 
and must appear in the scope of PAST tense. What remains to be clarified 
is  the  content  of  AspP,  and  the  interaction  of  the  aspectual  predicate 
ASPECT with the Perfective marker.  

I  will  follow  D&U’s  definition  of  PERFECTIVE  aspect  as  “a  spatio-
temporal predicate with the meaning of after,” and will show below that 
this definition consistently accounts for the possible distribution of SLQZ 
Perfective  marking  in  different  semantic  contexts.  Thus,  the  tense/aspect 
configuration that licenses the Perfective marker is as follows: Perfective 
aspect marking may only appear when licensed by PAST tense, a predicate 
ordering  the  external  RT  after  AST,  and  PERFECTIVE  aspect,  which  
orders AST after ET: 

TP

31.    
        
    
RT

T’

T

PAST
(after)

ASPP

AST

Asp’

Asp
PERF
(after)

VP

..t1....t2..

 
This configuration accounts for all the possible, attested uses of Perfec-
tive aspect, while ruling out disallowed usages: when RT refers to the ut-
terance time, a simple past reading results; when it refers to a past or future 
time, a past perfect or future perfect reading results. 

In its most common usage, the Perfective marker in SLQZ is used to de-

scribe completed, telic events: 

32.   B-guhty-a’ bzihny 
perf-kill-1s mouse 
 
 
“I killed a mouse”  
 
The  temporal  structure  of  this  sentence  is  schematized  in  the  timeline 
below.  The  event  of  killing  the  mouse  has  fixed  beginning  and  ending 
points  (t1  and  t2).  AST  is  ordered  after  the  end  of  the  event  (t2)  by  
PERFECTIVE  aspect,  and  UT,  in  turn,  is  ordered  after  AST  by  PAST 
tense.  

 

 

216      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

33.                           

 t1         t2   AST      UT 

______________|______|____|______|______________ 

 
                                   (cid:197)ET(cid:198) 
 

This  gives  the  intended  reading  of  “I  killed  a  mouse”:  the  speaker  is 
drawing  attention  to  an  interval  in  time  after  which  the  mouse  has  been 
killed, but before the present utterance time. 

Future perfect usages of Perfective aspect can also be accounted for un-
der the tense/aspect configuration shown in (33). Recall from section 6.1 
that sentences such as (34) (repeated below) have been used as evidence 
that Perfective marking encodes only aspect, rather than tense:   

tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike 
“When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten” 

 
34.  Yzh:ii         chih   y-zëhny-a’     al b-da’uhw  Gye’eihlly. 
 
 
 
This reading can be accounted for in the following way: the Perfective 
marker is licensed by PAST in its own clause, since there is no appropriate 
licenser (that is, no PAST tense) in the “when”-clause.  The external argu-
ment  of  TENSE  in  the  Perfective  clause,  however,  is  controlled  by 
FUTURE Tense in the “when” clause:    

35.  

TP

UT

T’

T

FUT.
(befor )
e

TP

RT

T’

 

ASPP

T

PAST
(after)

AST

ASP’

VP

ASP
PERF.
(after)

 
This  results  in  the  following  interpretation  of  the  Perfective-marked 
verb: PERFECTIVE aspect orders AST after ET (the time of eating) (thus, 
after t2), and PAST orders RT (the time of arriving) after AST. FUTURE 
tense in the “when”-clause, in turn, orders UT before RT.  

  36.                     UT      
    
 

 

___________|_______|_____|____|_____|_________   
 

         (cid:197)ET(cid:198) 

 

  t1        t2   AST    RT 

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

217 

 
This results in the correct reading: there is a time in the future (the time 

of arriving) at which an event of eating is already completed. 

 Note,  however,  that  nothing  in  the  definitions  of  PAST  tense  or 
PERFECTIVE aspect given above forces AST and ET to follow UT in fu-
ture perfect contexts:  (34) would still be a true and valid sentence if Mike 
finished eating before UT. The same seems to hold for future perfect con-
structions in English: 

 
37.  When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have sent out the letter. As a     

matter of fact, he probably sent it out already. 

 
Thus, another valid configuration for future perfect structures is as fol-

lows: 

                 t1        t2     AST   UT    RT   

 
38. 
      ___________|______|_____|____|_____|________________ 
                            (cid:197)ET(cid:198) 
 
Thus, the interpretation of future perfect constructions as PERFECTIVE  
aspect embedded under PAST and FUTURE tenses accounts for both the 
PPI status of the Perfective marker and the ability of the Perfective marker 
to participate in future readings. It also accounts for the flexible interpreta-
tions available to Perfective-marked verbs in future constructions. 

It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  derivation  of  the  future  perfect 
reading  in  (34)  cannot  be  extended  directly  to  English:    in  English,  the 
same  tense  must  appear  in  both  the  “when”-clause  and  the  main  clause, 
and perfective participles must appear with tensed auxiliaries: 

 
39.  When I arrived, Bill left/*leaves. 
40.  When(ever) I show up, Bill leaves/*left. 
41.  When I arrive tomorrow, Bill (*will) have already left. 

I have no account for this difference; I leave this matter aside for future 

investigation. 

Thus,  D&U’s  definition  of  PERFECTIVE  aspect,  combined  with  the 
SLQZ  requirement  that  Perfective-marked  verbs  be  licensed  by  PAST 
tense,  accounts  for  the  temporal  interpretation  of  telic  events  in  a  
straightforward  way.  But  how  can  PERFECTIVE  aspect,  which  orders 
AST after the completion of an event, be used felicitously with states and 
atelic events, which have no defined starting points or endpoints? As seen 
in (13) and (14), there are clear constraints on the use of Perfective mark-
ing in stative contexts: Perfective-marked verbs may describe past states, 

 

218      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

but not future ones. This constraint, too, falls out as a natural result of the 
interacting requirements of PAST tense and PERFECTIVE aspect. 

The  requirement  that  Perfective-marked  verbs  be  licensed  by  PAST 
tense  rules out the use of Perfective aspect in descriptions of future states.  
Consider the following: 

perf-be-3s.prox  heavy 
*“He will be/will have been heavy” 

 
42.  G-uhc-ëng  nnàa’ah 
 
 
 
 Unlike    the  future  perfective  sentence  in  (34),  this  sentence  has  no 
modifying  adverbial  or  matrix  clause  containing  FUTURE  tense.  Thus, 
there is no possible future external reference time for the PAST verb, and 
thus no way  for the state of being heavy to be interpreted as occuring after 
UT. Below is the schemata for the intended reading of the sentence:    

43.
 

UT

AST

(cid:197)
……………… ……
                            

ET

(cid:198) 

 
Here, UT is ordered before AST (giving the future reading of the sen-
tence), and AST is ordered after the event (ET) by PERFECTIVE aspect. 
As in the past stative cases, AST provides a default endpoint to ET.  

This schema, however, violates the requirement that Perfective aspect in 
SLQZ be under the scope of PAST tense:  as shown above, Perfective as-
pect wrongly appears under FUTURE tense, violating the requirements the 
Perfective  marker  PPI  places  on  Tense.  Thus,  the  disallowal  of  future 
states descriptions with (unmodified) Perfective aspect can be ruled out. 

Now consider the case of Perfective-marked verbs denoting past states: 
 
44.  G-uhc-ëng  nnàa’ah. 
 
 
 

perf-be-3s.prox  heavy 
“He was heavy” 

This is most naturally interpreted as meaning the person under discus-
sion was heavy during some undefined length of time in the past, but is no 
longer heavy now. 

 

  45.   
 

AST

UT

(cid:198) 
                            ……

(cid:197)
…… ………………
                            

ET

6.4  Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ 

219 

Because “be heavy” denotes a state, rather than a telic event, it has no 
readily  definable  beginning  or  ending  point  in  time  (unless  provided  by 
context, or adverbial expressions). Since PERFECTIVE aspect orders AST 
after ET (in this case, ET being the time during which he was heavy), the 
state  of  heaviness  must  be  construed  as  beginning  (and  ending)  at  some 
point before AST.  Since PAST Tense orders UT after AST, the state of 
being heavy must  end before AST  for the sentence to be interpretable. 
Thus, AST provides a default endpoint for the event, and the sentence gets 
its natural interpretation: “he was heavy” from some undetermined (or con-
textually defined) time in the past until some point (AST or a point before 
AST) before the utterance time.  

6.4.4 A Potential Counterexample: Perfective Imperatives 

Now I return to the case of imperatives, the one construction in which the 
Perfective marker does not encode a past event: 

46.  B-ìi’lly! 
perf-sing 
“Sing!” 

 
A  potential  correlation  between  the  use  of  the  Perfective  aspect,  nor-
mally used to express past events, and imperatives, used to describe possi-
ble future events, comes from Iatridou (2000), who notes that both Modern 
Greek and English use past morphology in expressions of counterfactual 
and hypothetical events  (such as “If you went to Oaxaca, you would  love 
the food ”), and that the past morphology in these contexts does not encode 
actual  past  tense.  However,  SLQZ,  unlike  Modern  Greek  and  English, 
does not use the same verbal tense/aspect morphology in conditional con-
structions and normal past-tense constructions.  

A  stronger  correlation  comes  from  Hyam’s  (to  appear)  analysis  of  
children’s  use  of  Modern  Greek  bare  perfectives:  Modern  Greek,  like 
SLQZ, does not employ infinitival verb forms; inflected verbs may appear 
with  independent  tense,  aspect,  and  mood  markers.  Small  children  
acquiring  Modern  Greek  often  use  verb  forms  with  perfective  aspect  
marking, but no tense marking; Hyams argues that these forms correspond 
to the  root infinitival constructions used by young children learning Eng-
lish and other languages with infinitival verb forms. 

Hyams also notes a strong tendency for children to use bare perfectives 

in modal contexts, particularly those expressing commands or desires: 

 
47.  Kupisi i kateti 
 
 

wipe.perf.3s. the mirror 
“I want to wipe the mirror” 
 
Modern Greek: Hyams, to appear 

220      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

 
Following Barbiers 1995, Hyams adopts the following hypothesis for a 
correlation  between perfective aspect and deontic modality: Deontic mo-
dality, unlike epistemic modality, involves a polarity transition, that is, it 
necessarily  encodes  a  “switch”  from  a  situation  when  an  event  has  not 
been realized to one in which it is fully realized (or at least, is desired to be 
fully realized). Perfective aspect encodes a similar polarity transition, from 
a point in time in which an event hasn’t been completed to a point in time 
where it has been completed. Hyams thus proposes that deontic modality 
and  perfective  aspect  both  encode  a  “transition  feature”  that  can  operate 
both over worlds (in the modal cases) and periods of time (in the aspectual 
cases). Children who have not yet acquired the adult modal forms can thus 
use bare perfectives to encode mood and to check mood features syntacti-
cally (via verb movement to MoodP). (Hyams notes that children under 4 
can express deontic, but not epistemic, modality.) 

Returning to SLQZ, I will assume that the Perfective marker on impera-
tives is defective and lacks PAST tense features. Instead, it encodes only 
Perfective aspect and mood, and, like child bare perfectives in Greek, can 
check both aspectual and mood features. Thus, like Greek bare perfectives, 
SLQZ  imperative  verbs    raise  to  MoodP  to  realize  their  deontic  modal 
readings.  This  is  also  consistent  with  Hyam’s  analysis  of  imperatives  as 
non-finite (that, is tenseless), and Zanuttini’s (1994, cited in Hyams, to ap-
pear) observation that infinitival verbs in Italian may be used in imperative 
constructions: 

 
48.  Non telefonare! 
 
 

neg  call.imp. 
“Don’t call!”  

 

Italian: Hyams, to appear. 

6.5 The Syntax of TP: Reconciling Predicate TENSE with 

VP-Raising 

The  precise  application  of  Stowell’s  proposal  to  the  syntactic  structures 
outlined  for  SLQZ  in  previous  chapters  of  this  work,  however,  raises  a 
number of questions: Stowell assumes that the positions in TP occupied by  
ZP-UT/RT  and  ZP-ET  are  distinct  from  positions  occupied  by  actual 
nominal  and  clausal  arguments.  In  his  1993  and  1995  papers,  he  thus  
assumed  the  possibility  that  TP  has  multiple  specifiers,  one  for  nominal  
arguments  and  one  for  the  external  argument  of  TENSE.3  This  idea  is  
also  suggested  by  D&U.  This  possibility  clearly  violates  Antisymmetry 
constraints, which state that all syntactic relations can be reduced to those 
between a single specifier, a head, and a complement.  

                                                      
3 Another possibility he raises is that subjects don’t  land in spec, TP. 

6.5  The Syntax of TP 

221 

Furthermore,  the  semantic  functions  of  TENSE  appear  to  be  at  odds 
with  my  proposal  that  VP  remnants  raise  through  spec,  AspP  into  spec, 
TP: if Stowell’s account is correct and VPs themselves contain temporal 
arguments that need to be controlled by the internal ZP argument of TP, 
then there is no way for VP itself raise into spec, TP (which houses the ex-
ternal ZP argument of TENSE) without violating this requirement. If the 
head of TP itself is a predicate that takes distinct internal and external ar-
guments,  and  if  projections  can  have  at  most  one  specifier  (per  Kayne), 
this would mean the VP-remnant itself would have to serve as both the in-
ternal  and  external  argument  of  TP,  if  Stowell’s  proposal  is  to  hold.  In 
short, VP-remnants would have to raise from the complement of TP (from 
the  internal  argument  position  of  T)  to  the  specifier  of  TP  (the  external  
argument position of of T), or even higher: 

49. 
 

     

TP

ZP

T’

VP

Z’

T

ZP

t

…

    
 
 Similar problems result for the analysis of aspect: if D&U are correct 
and AspP is a predicate taking two arguments, and if VPs raise from their 
base position through the specifier of AspP, then VP must simultaneously 
be posited as both (part of ) the internal argument of AspP and its external 
argument. Since it is generally held that no argument may take more than 
one  thematic  role  (and  thus  be  assigned  both  internal  and  external  argu-
ment positions), there is a clear problem in reconciling Stowell and D&U’s  
models of tense and aspect with the previously outlined VP-raising model 
of SLQZ. 

Stowell also assumes that the ZP arguments of TP are interleaved with 
other functional projections (such as AGRSP and AGROP), and are trans-
parent  to movement through these projections. This forces the question of 
where these ZP arguments are generated, and how they can account for the 
constraints on tense interpretation in SLQZ. 

Another  question  raised  by  the  reconciliation  of  obligatory VP-raising 
and  Stowell’s  tense  theory  is  the  independent  temporal  interpretation  of 
relative clauses with past-interpreted verbs: recall from the preceding sec-
tion  that  past-interpreted  relative  clauses  are  intepreted  as  unordered  in 
time  with  regard  to  past-interpreted  matrix  clause  verbs.  Stowell  (1995) 
suggests  this  occurs  because  relative  clauses  (or  DPs  containing  them) 
raise  out  of  VP  (and  the  temporal  argument  in  the  spec  of  VP)  into  
agreement  projections  for  case-marking  purposes,  and  thus  cannot  inter-
preted as under the scope of matrix clause tense. This analysis is likewise 

222      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

problematic  for  a  VP-remnant-raising  analysis:  since  all  arguments,  both 
clausal and nominal (including relative clauses) generated within VP nec-
essarily raise out of VP before VP raises in to TP, then both nominal and 
clausal  complements  of  a  verb  should  be  expected  to  be  interpreted  as 
temporally independent from the verb. But as seen above, this is not the 
case; SLQZ shows the same asymmetries between the temporal interpreta-
tion of relative clause and clausal complements as languages assumed to 
employ verbal head-movement, such as English.  

In  short,  there  are  two  basic  problems  in  reconciling  the  VP-remnant-
raising analysis of SLQZ syntax with Stowell/ D&U’s syntactic accounts 
of TENSE and ASPECT: (1) where VP raises to in the TP complex and (2) 
why    nominal  (relative  clause)  and  clausal  complements  show  different 
dependencies  on  matrix  clause  tense  if  both  necessarily  raise  out  of  VP 
(and thus out of the syntactic scope of the temporal argument in spec, VP).  
I will assume that the basic structure of TENSE and ASPECT proposed 
by  Stowell  and  D&U  is  correct.  The  external  temporal  argument  of  VP 
(PRO- ZP) has a logical thematic position in the previously outlined inter-
nal structure of VP in SLQZ: the specifier position of VPasp, the outermost 
VP shell: 

 
50. 

 

VPasp

 

PRO-ZP

V’

V

VPcaus

DPsubj

V’

V

VP
…..

                      
This  analysis  is  consistent  both  with  the  semantic  function  of  VPasp  
(to  introduce  a    verbal  predicate  that  denotes  spatiotemporal  location)  
and  enables  Stowell’s  proposal  that  temporal  variables  are  generated  in 
spec, VP to be reconciled with the antisymmetry-driven requirement that 
each  projection  have  only  one  specifier.  In  D&U’s  terms,  the  external  
argument  of  VPasp  represents  AST,  the  external  argument  of    AspP  and 
the internal argument of TP. 

Under Stowell’s model, the temporal argument of VP is a variable that 
is bound (hence, c-commanded) by an operator in the internal ZP argument 
of TENSE. Thus, the event denoted by VP gets a temporal value by being 
under the syntactic scope of Z 

I    will  suggest  that  in  SLQZ,  where  VP  remnants  raise  for  feature-
checking purposes, the VP raises into and surfaces in the specifier of the 
internal ZP argument of TENSE:   

 

6.5  The Syntax of TP 

223 

51. 

 

TP

ZP

T’

T

ZP

VP

Z

’

Z

AspP

…

 
Thus, the temporal features of PRO-ZP in VPasp are checked by speci-
fier-head  agreement  within  ZP, rather than c-command by Z.  This is 
consistent with Minimalist assumptions that all agreement and feature check-
ing is licensed via spec-head agreement (Chomsky 1992, 1995), and is also 
consistent with the fact that VP is interpreted as an internal argument of 
TENSE. In short, VP does not raise into TP itself, but into one of the ZP 
arguments selected by  and generated by TP.  

This account is also consistent with the scope-sensitive  nature of PPIs 
such  as  the  SLQZ  Perfective  marker:  under  this  analysis,  the  Perfective 
marker in the outermost VP shell surfaces under TP, and thus is properly 
licensed.  

Kural  (1998)  likewise  proposes  a  similar  account  for  English  verb-
movement:  he argues that English verbs raise to the head of the ZP com-
plement of T. Kural’s argument is motivated by the discrepancy between 
the  well-known  evidence  against  movement  of  English  verbs  out  of  VP 
into  INFL/Tense  (such  as  the  fact  that  lexical  verbs  may  not  raise  past 
clausal negation (*He likes not anchovies)  nor appear higher than certain 
adverbs  (*He  eats    often  anchovies)  and  the  behavior  of  causative  con-
structions  with  unaccusative  verbs,  which  suggest  the  presence  of  verb 
movement out of VP. 

His evidence for verb movement in causative constructions comes from 

his analysis of constructions such as the following: 

52.  Mary often made him arrive late. 
Following Burzio (1986), Kural assumes that unaccusative verbs such as 
arrive  take  a  single  internal  argument,  base-generated  as  a  complement, 
but do not assign accusative case. Thus, AgrOP in the complement clause 
is unavailable, and the accusative case on him in (50) must result from him 
raising to AgrOP in the matrix clause. 

If this is so, however, it must also be assumed that the verb made  has 
raised out of VP. Since AgrOP is generated above VP, yet the verb appears 
above him, which Kural assumes to have raised to matrix clause AgrOP, 
the  verb  must  be  in  a  position  above  AgrOP  itself.  Yet  the  fact  that  the 

224      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

verb is preceded by often also suggests that the verb could not have raised 
as high as TP. Thus, the verb must have raised out of VP and past AgrOP, 
but not as high as T. Kural thus suggests the internal argument of TP, ZP 
as an appropriate landing position for English verbs. 

Aspectual features are checked in the following way:  the event time of 
VP itself, per D&U, serves as the internal argument of AspP. The AST (the 
PRO-ZP argument of VPasp, in my terms) serves as the external argument 
of AspP and the internal argument of TP.  

There are two possible ways for VP to be realized as the internal argu-
ment of AspP: either (1) VP itself, in its base-generated position below the 
subject and object agreement projections, serves as the internal argument 
of AspP, or, (2) parallel to Stowell’s model of Tense, the relationship be-
tween  AspP  and  VP  is  moderated  by  an  internal  ZP  argument  of  AspP, 
which assigns a temporal value to VP. For the sake of consistency, I will 
assume the latter possibility: AspP takes as its complement a ZP argument, 
which  assigns  a  temporal  value  to  VP.  VP  raises  into  spec,  ZP,  parallel 
with its movement into ZP in TP, to check these features: 

 
53. 

 
AspP

Asp’

Asp

ZP

VPasp

Z’

PRO-ZP

       

ZV’

AgrSP

…

V

VP

 
VPasp then raises into spec, AspP, where the features of PRO-ZP in the 

specifier of VPasp   are checked: 

 
54.         

AspP

VPasp

Asp’

PRO-ZP

V’

Asp

ZP

V

VP

t

....

6.6  Habitual “Aspect” in SLQZ 

225 

From  this  point,  VPasp  raises  to  the  specifier  of  the  internal  ZP  argu-

ment of TP.       

This still leaves open the question of why relative clause arguments in 
SLQZ    remain  temporally  independent  of  the  clauses  that  select  them, 
while clausal complements do not. I will argue that this difference results 
from  the  inherently  different  structural  requirements  of  nominal  and 
clausal arguments. Stowell (1981) proposes that case-assigning categories 
(such as tensed CPs) may not appear in case-marked positions (the Case 
Resistance Principle, summarized in this work in Chapter 3). Conversely, 
case-receiving categories (specifically, nominals) may not assign case. As 
shown in the previous chapters, however, both nominal and clausal argu-
ments raise out of VP into specific licensing positions before the VP itself 
actually raises into the domain of TENSE. It must be the case, then, that 
the positions that license nominal arguments (AgrSP and AgrOP) are case-
assigning positions, while the projection that licenses clausal complements 
(LP) is not. 

This generalization can be reformulated in the following way. As previ-
ously  described,  clausal  arguments  inherit  some  of  the  tense  features  of 
matrix  clause  verbs,  while  nominal  arguments  do  not.  Thus,  projections 
that are assigned case may not inherit tense features; and projections that 
inherit tense features may not be assigned case.    

A possibility I will consider here, consistent with this generalization, is 
that the LP position where complement clauses surface is a ZP projection: 
like the internal ZP argument of TP, it assigns a temporal value to a projec-
tion in its specifier. ZP-LP, as I will call this projection, is controlled by 
the internal ZP argument of TP. Thus, the external temporal argument of 
any embedded clause is indirectly controlled by the ZP argument of TP, as 
Stowell’s theory predicts. The AgrP projections into which nominal argu-
ments  of  VP  raise  lack  such  temporal  features;  thus,  events  expressed 
within relative clauses may be interpreted with any time as their external 
argument. 

6.6  Habitual “Aspect” in SLQZ: Evidence for PRESENT 

Tense 

Another  aspect  marker  that  shows  interpretive  effects  associated  with 
Tense  is the Habitual marker r-.  The Habitual marker,  as its name im-
plies, is used to denote ongoing  or regularly repeated states or events: 

55.  Tu r-yu’lààa’z Li’eb? 
who hab-like   Felipe 
 
 
“Who does Felipe like?” 
 

226      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 
 

always    hab-forget        Mike      irr-feed   Mike         dog 
“Mike always forgets to feed the dog” 

56.  Zë’cydihs r-yennlààa’z Gyeeihly y-gyaan Gye’eihlly bèe’cw 
 
 
 
It is also used to express present perfect readings with stative predicates: 
 
57.  A            g-uhc tsèi’ny wbihzh r-ahcx:ùu’w Gye’eihlly 
 

already   perf-be fifteen day    hab-sick     Mike 
“Mike has been sick for fifteen days” 

 
 
This  is  similar  to  the  pattern  seen  in  Romance  languages,  which  use 
simple present tense in stative contexts in which English uses the present 
perfect. 

Habitual-marked  verbs  in  complements  of  verbs  with  past  readings  
behave  like  English  present-tense  verbs:  they  allow  only  double-access 
readings  (that  is,  readings  in  which  the  embedded  verb  is  interpreted  as 
“present-tense” both in relation to the UT  and to the past time denoted by 
the  matrix  clause).    This  reading  can  be  seen  in  the  following  English  
example:    

58.  Pam said Marcy is sick. 
This  gets  the  interpretation  that  Marcy  was  sick  both  at  the  past  time 
when  Pam  said  she  was,  and  is  also  sick  at  UT.  In  other  words,  if 
PRESENT tense is a predicate establishing an overlapping relationship be-
tween a reference time and an event time (per Stowell), then Marcy’s sick-
ness is construed as overlapping two different event times: the present time 
(UT) and the past time provided by matrix clause ET. 

 The double-access reading results in SLQZ whether or not the comple-

ment clause is preposed: 

59.  R-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb  ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly nài’  
 
hab-sick    Felipe neut-say Mike yesterday 
Yesterday, Mike said Felipe is sick” 
 
 
[F. was sick then, is sick now] 

60.  Nài’  ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly r-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb 
 
 

yesterday neut-say Mike hab-sick Felipe 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe is sick” 
 
[F. was sick then, is sick now] 

This cannot mean Felipe was sick yesterday but not now, nor that Felipe 
wasn’t sick yesterday but is now. This, along with the fact that Habitual 
marking  is  not  used  to  express  past  states,  suggests  that  the  Habitual 
marker is a Past Anti-Polarity Item (PAI) (per Stowell 1995): it must not 
be  governed  by  PAST  tense.  Following  Stowell,  I  assume  that  PAIs  en-
code PRESENT tense, and thus the Habitual marker must be licensed by 
PRESENT. 

6.6  Habitual “Aspect” in SLQZ 

227 

Stowell  argues  that  the  obligatory  double-access  readings  of  present-
under-past sentences result from the PAI status of present-tense markers: 
in English examples such as (58), the embedded clause must obligatorily 
raise out of the scope of matrix PAST tense by LF. This raising allows the 
embedded clause PRESENT tense to take UT as its external argument, and 
thus be interpreted as simultaneous with UT. On the other hand, the fact 
that the embedded clause is generated (and surfaces as) a complement of 
the  matrix  clause  PAST  verb  allows  the  PRESENT-tense  verb  to  be  
interpreted under the scope of PAST and inherit the matrix clause ET as its 
external RT. 

The SLQZ facts are consistent with this hypothesis. The obligatory dou-
ble-access readings of Habitual clauses under past-interpreted clauses can 
be  posited  as  the  result  of  raising  of  the  complement  out  of  the  matrix 
clause  at  LF.  The  double-access  readings  of  overtly  extraposed  Habitual 
clauses  result from reconstruction.  

Further  evidence  that  Habitual  markers  are  PAIs  comes  from  their  
interpretation  when  embedded  under  future  matrix  clauses.  When  Habit-
ual-marked verbs appear in complements of future clauses, they receive fu-
ture-shifted readings: 

 

 

 
61.  Yzh:ii y-nnìi Gye’eihlly r-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb 
 
 

tomorrow irr-say Mike hab-sick Felipe 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe is sick” 
[F. will be sick at time of saying] 

 
My  consultant  gives  this  the  following  interpretation:  Mike  knows 
Felipe will be absent from some obligation the next day, and plans to cover 
for him by saying he is sick. Thus, the external RT argument of the em-
bedded clause is controlled by the matrix clause ET. 

In contrast, when the Habitual-marked complement is preposed, a dou-
ble-access reading results: the complement clause event is construed as si-
multaneous with both the matrix clause UT and the matrix clause ET: 

 
62.  R-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb y-nnìi Gye’eihlly yzh:ii 
 
 

hab-sick   Felipe irr-say Mike  tomorrow 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe is sick” 
[F. sick both now and tomorrow] 

 
Like the present-under-past cases above, the double access reading here 
can  be  attributed  to  reconstruction:  fronting  of  the  complement  clause 
leaves the external argument of PRESENT tense unbound, so it takes UT 
as its value. LF reconstruction of the complement back into its embedded 
position  places  the  external  clause  RT  under  the  scope  of  matrix  clause 
PAST, and it gets its value from matrix past ET. 

228      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

6.6.1 The Aspectual Features of the Habitual Marker 

As argued above, the Habitual marker is a PAI that may only appear out of 
the scope of PAST tense, and must be licensed by PRESENT tense.  But  
how does ASPECT treat the Habitual marker? 

The  HABITUAL  aspectual  predicate,  like  PERFECTIVE  aspect,  is  a 
spatiotemporal predicate that establishes a temporal/locational relationship 
between AST and ET. I will argue that the HABITUAL  aspect predicate 
(HAB for short) establishes a relationship of containment betwen AST and  
ET. In other words, Habitual-marked verbs denote events in which the as-
sertion time (the time being highlighted/focused by the speaker) contains 
the event time. This definition of HAB, along with the PAI status of the 
Habitual marker, are combined in the following tense/aspect configuration: 

 
63.      

 

TP

UT

T’

T

PRES.
(overlaps)

TP

AST

ASP’

VP

ASP
HAB
(before) …t1…t2…

 
This configuration accounts for all and only the allowable usages of the 
Habitual aspect marker in SLQZ. Below, I will consider in turn each of the 
contexts in which HABITUAL aspect may appear: in the description of at-
elic states, present perfect readings of stative verbs, and habitually repeated 
telic events. 

Atelic Events/States 
As mentioned earlier, Habitual aspect is used to describe ongoing, present-
tense states when used with atelic verbs: 

hab-like          Felipe Mike 
“Felipe likes Mike” 

 
64.  R-yu’lààa’z Li’eb Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
Because the state of liking Mike has no fixed beginning point or ending 
point, ET is assumed to include all times (or at least, all points in time dur-
ing a contextually relevant period, such as Felipe’s lifetime). HAB orders 
ET inside AST, so the speaker is highlighting a period of time containing 

6.6  Habitual “Aspect” in SLQZ

229 

the time during which Felipe likes Mike, and is thus is asserting that it is 
always the case that Felipe likes Mike. 

 
65.       

UT

AST

…………..

(cid:198)

(cid:197)

…………

           
PRESENT  tense,  in  turn,  orders  UT  simultaneous  with  AST.  The  re-
 
quired  presence  of  PRESENT  tense  correctly  blocks  Habitual-marked 
verbs from denoting states that do not overlap with UT. 

Telic Events 
The  habitual,  iterative  interpretation  of  telic  events  described  with  
Habitual-marked verbs can also be accounted for by the definition of HAB 
proposed above.  Consider, for example,  a Habitual sentence with a telic 
verb such as the following: 

hab-do-with Mike      Felipe homework 
“Mike does homework with Felipe” 

 
66.  R-uhny-nèe Gye’eihlly Li’eb tarèe 
 
 
 
This  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  Mike  is  doing  homework  with 
Felipe at the moment the speaker says this sentence. Rather, it has the same 
meaning as its English gloss: that there are repeated intervals, within some 
contextually determined period of time, during which Felipe does home-
work with Mike. This can be schematized as follows: 

67. 

 
____|____|_____|___|____|____|___|_____ 
... ET1

ET3  ...

ET2

UT

 
This  use  of  the  Habitual  marker  relies  most  crucially  on  the  idea  that 
AST contains the event time. As seen in (65), AST is not a single point in 
time with a temporal relation to a single event time, but rather a period of 
time  that  includes  a  set  of  discontinous  event  times.  (65)  shows,  as  the 
reading of (66) predicts, that UT need only be within AST; it is not neces-
sary  for  UT  to  overlap  in  time  with  any  of  the  actual  events  of  doing 
homework. In short, the speaker who utters (66) is not actually describing 
an  event  or  events,  but  is  pointing  out  a  state  of  affairs  in  which  such 
events exist. This stative reading of Habitual-marked telic verbs results in 
their generic flavor. 

 

230      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

The definition of HAB outlined above shows a number of parallels with 
Chierchia’s (1992) analysis of habitual constructions. He  analyses habit-
ual  constructions  as  a  subset  of  generic  constructions:    in  the  semantic 
model he argues for, generic readings result when a generic operator (Gn) 
is  generated  in  Asp,  and  scopes  over  felicitous  situations  in  which  the  
generic  or  habitual  event  occurs.  For  instance,  a  sentence  such  as  “Fred 
smokes” has the following semantic representation: 

68.  Gn s[C(f,s)][smoke(f,s)] [Chierchia 1992, p. 26] 
           f= Fred  
C  (the  context  variable)  represents  the  felicitous  contexts  in  which 
Fred’s  smoking  may  occur  (he  must  be  awake,  he  must  have  his  lighter 
with him, etc.). C is bound by Gn, which also binds the argument s, which 
represents situations in which Fred smokes. Thus, the fact of Fred being a 
smoker would hold true even during the times in which he is not smoking.  
Like the definition of HAB argued for previously, Chierchia’s account 
captures  the  fact  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  an  event  to  be  perpetually  
ongoing  for  it  to  be  generically  or  habitually  true.  A  particularly  salient 
parallel between his analysis and mine is that he posits the generic operator 
to be generated in AspP:  while aspect is most commonly defined as a de-
scription  of  the  internal  temporal  structure  of  an  event  (Chung  and  
Timberlake  1985),  Chierchia  shares  my  intuition  that  genericity/habitual 
readings, which potentially take scope over a series of events, can be most 
appropriately be handled as an aspectual feature. 

Chierchia’s  account,  however,  diverges  from  mine  in  several  respects. 
For  one,  he  specifically  associates  the  generic  readings  of  habitual  
constructions crosslinguistically to the presence of  the Gn operator: mor-
phemes that encode habitual aspect, he argues, are polarity items that must 
be  under  the  scope  of  Gn.  This  certainly  cannot  be  the  case  in  SLQZ, 
where  Habitual-marked  verbs  are  often  used  with  non-generic  readings 
(such as present perfect constructions, for instance).  

Also, there are clear advantages to positing the generic flavor of Habit-
ual readings as a natural result of the definition  of HAB itself: for one, it 
leads  to  a  simpler,  more  uniform  syntactic  and  semantic  representation. 
Chierchia  does  not  explicitly  define  exactly  what  the  Gn  operator  does, 
and indeed states that this would be extremely difficult to do (p. 28-29). 
Genericity in my account is a natural side effect of the function of AST  
under  HAB;  there  is  no  need  to  posit  the  existence  of  additional  
operators.This  also  allows  HAB  to  be  treated  as  structurally  parallel  to 
other aspects: the aspectual predicate itself does all the work. Another ad-
vantage  of  my  approach  is  that  it  allows  stage-level  and  individual-level 
predicates  marked  with  Habitual  aspect 
treated  uniformly:  
differences  in  their  interpretation  under  Habitual  aspect  result  from  their 
own  thematic structure, not from different treatments by ASP. 

to  be 

6.6  Habitual “Aspect” in SLQZ

231 

The  remaining  fact  that  needs  to  be  accounted  for  is  why  HAB  
necessarily results in readings in which an event denoted by a telic verb 
repeats  itself  multiple  times.  If  the  schema  in  (61)  is  correct,  then  the  
Habitual aspect marker has two requirements: that it be within the scope of 
PRESENT tense (thus locating UT within AST), and that AST contain the 
ET. Thus, why are the following configurations (in which AST contains a 
single ET that either follows or precedes UT) disallowed? 

69. 

 
 
70. 

___________|___|____|______________

UT

ET

(cid:197)

………………AST………………….

(cid:198)

______________|__________|___|____

UT

ET
………………AST………………….

(cid:197)

(cid:198)

        
A possible answer to this is that the function of AST in these construc-
tions is vacuous: the reason AST contains ET (and UT) in its grammatical 
usages is to express the idea that the state of affairs under discussion is on-
going, and has extended from the past through the present, and will likely 
continue into the future. In the configurations above, however, AST fails 
to serve this purpose. Rather, it results in the expression of the idea that 
there is a single bounded event happening within a period of time contain-
ing the UT, but says nothing about the temporal relation of UT to ET. This 
is uninformative, and thus disallowed.  

Suggestive evidence for this comes from Yatzatchi Zapotec (YZ), which 
lacks a Habitual aspect morpheme. Rather, YZ verbs in sentences express-
ing habitual states or events appear with both a Progressive aspect marker 
and a marker indicating repeated actions: 

71.     Ch-ez-sel´  ´bo’on 
           prog-rep-order-3sF-3s 
          “He orders it again and again”     (Butler 1980) 
 
Assuming  D&U’s  definition  of  Progressive  aspect  as a spatiotemporal 
predicate locating ASP within ET, then YZ habitual constructions can be 
seen as highlighting points of time within a series of repeated events. Thus, 
in YZ, the need for an event to be repeated in order for it to be interpreted 
as  habitual is directly reflected in the verbal morphology. 

It  is  conceivable  that  the  SLQZ  Habitual  aspect  marker  r-  is  derived 
from a multimorphemic habitual construction such as that used in YZ. The 
fact  that  the  Habitual  aspect  marker  in  SLQZ  is  the  only  aspect  marker 
with only one allomorph supports the possibility that it may be a derived, 
more  recent  form.  Also,  SLQZ  lacks  the  “secondary  aspect  marker”  YZ 
uses to express repetition. Perhaps the loss of this marker resulted in the re-
interpretation of AST in habitual events from highlighting intervals of time 

232      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

within repeated events to highlighting intervals of times containing an un-
specified number of events. 

Present Perfect Use of the Habitual Marker 
The present perfect readings of Habitual-marked stative verbs can also be 
derived from the above constraints: 

top   perf-be fifteen day       hab-sick       Mike 
“Mike has been sick for fifteen days” 

 
72.  A      g-uhc  tsèi’ny wbihzh r-ahcx:ùu’w Gye’eihlly 
 
 
 
Present  perfect  readings  only  result  in  this  context in SLQZ when the 
starting point of the state is explicitly given. Furthermore, the “beginning 
points”  of  present  perfect  events  in  SLQZ  are  always  introduced  with  a 
Perfective copula, as seen above. This gives rise to a configuration nearly 
identical  to  that  in  the  Habitual  under  PAST  construction  seen  in  (59). 
Since the Habitual marker is a PAI, Habitual marked clauses must raise out 
of the scope of the Perfective (PAST-containing) clause in order to be licit. 
However,  they  must  also  reconstruct  back  into  the  scope  of  the    PAST 
clause, where they are generated, at LF. This gives rise to a double-access 
reading: Mike’s sickness is interpreted as simultaneous with both the past 
time denoted by the adverbial clause (that is, he was sick fifteen days ago), 
and the UT (Mike is still sick now). This gives the desired reading: Mike’s 
sickness is simultaneous with the present time as well with a point in time 
fifteen days ago. Since sickness is interpreted as a state rather than a telic 
event, Mike’s sickness is thus interpreted as continuous: it spans from the 
beginning point fifteen days ago to the present time. 

The  aspectual  features  of  the  Habitual  marker  support  this  analysis  as 
well. Just as PRESENT tense is interpreted relative to two RTs (UT and 
the past time fifteen days ago), HABITUAL aspect establishes a contain-
ment relation between AST and two event times: the past time of sickness 
and the present time of sickness. This results in a reading in which the two 
ASTs overlap and are interpreted as denoting a single interval of sickness. 
Habitual marked verbs are also used in another “non-habitual” context 
as well: when verbs that may appear with Neutral aspect, the other stative 
aspect in SLQZ, appear with Habitual aspect, they are interpreted as even-
tive, rather than stative:    

 
73.  Yra’ta gwèelchih r-zêiny-a’,      ø-zùub  zhye’eht loh mee’s 
 
 
 

all     time   when hab-arrive-1s  neut-sit  cat        on table 
“Whenever I arrive, the cat is seated on the table” 

6.7  “Pure” Aspect Markers in SLQZ 

233 

all     time   when hab-arrive-1s  hab-sit  cat        on table 
“Whenever I arrive, the cat sits on the table” 

74.  Yra’ta gwèelchih r-zêiny-a’,      r-zùub  zhye’eht loh mee’s 
 
 
 
In  the  first  case,  with  Neutral  aspect  on  “sit”,  the  cat  is  already  in  a 
seated state when the speaker arrives. In the second example, with Habit-
ual aspect, the sitting is interpreted as an action rather than a state:  the cat 
jumps on the table and sits down as the speaker enters, for instance. 

I  will  return  to  this  usage  of  Habitual  aspect  in  the  discussion  of  the 
Neutral aspect, marker, a stative marker with a more restricted and marked 
usage.  

6.7 “Pure” Aspect Markers in SLQZ 

In the previous sections, I showed evidence that the Habitual and Perfec-
tive aspect markers in SLQZ are dependent on the presence of PRESENT 
and PAST tense, respectively. While I argue that Tense is inherently pre-
sent in all SLQZ sentences, it is not the case that all SLQZ aspect markers 
are  specifically  sensitive  to  tense  selection  restrictions.  In  the  following 
sections, I briefly discuss the distribution and interpretation of two purely 
aspectual markers: the  Progressive marker and the Neutral marker. 

6.7.1 Progressive Aspect 

As  previously  seen,  the  Progressive  marker  can  have  present,  past,  or  
future readings in matrix clauses: 

 
75.  Ca-bee’z-a’ lìu’ 
prog-wait-1s you 
 
 
“I am/was/will be waiting for you”  
When embedded under past clauses, it can have either a double-access-

like or simultaneous reading, depending on context: 

 
76.  Nài        ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly cay-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb 
yesterday   neut-say Mike    prog-sick     Felipe 
 
 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe is sick” 
           [F. was sick at both time of saying and UT] 
 
77.  Nài        ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly cay-uàll Li’eb 
 
 
           [F. was singing at time of saying, not at UT] 
 

yesterday   neut-say Mike    prog-sing     Felipe 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe was singing” 

 

 

 

 

234      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

The fact that the apparent double-access reading in (76) is not required 
for  all  Progressive-under-past  constructions  suggests  that  Progressive 
marking is not a PAI.  The different possible interpretations of the above 
sentences  are  probably  determinined  by  pragmatic  factors:  it  is  plausible 
for someone to be sick for a period of several days, but not for someone to 
be singing continuously for several days. 

Similar effects result when Progressive verbs appear in complements of 

Irrealis verbs: 

78.  Li’eb ca-yùall y-nnìi Gye’eihlly yzh:ii 
Felipe prog-sing irr-say Mike tomorrow 
 
 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe is singing”  
[F. will be singing at time of saying] 

 
79.  Cay-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb y-nnìi Gye’eihlly yzh:ii 
 
 

prog-sick     Felipe irr-say Mike tomorrow 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe is sick”  
[F. sick now, will be sick tomorrow] 

As  in the Progressive under PAST cases, “singing” under Irrealis is in-
terpreted as future-shifted (future progressive) while “being sick” under Ir-
realis is interpreted with a double-access interpretation (Felipe will be sick 
at the time of saying (tomorrow), and is sick now as well). This seems to 
occur whether or not the Progressive complement is fronted. 

The Progressive marker is neither  a PAI nor a PPI. Thus, it has neither 
inherent  PRESENT  or  PAST  readings,  and  may  be  controlled  by 
PRESENT, PAST, or FUTURE tense. Unlike the Habitual marker and Per-
fective markers, the Progressive marker is purely aspectual, and may ap-
pear with any tense. The presence of a covert TENSE head, either in its 
own clause or in a clause taking the Progressive-marked verb as its com-
plement, contributes to the realization of present, past or future progressive 
readings. 

 Defining PROGRESSIVE Aspect 
I  will 
follow  Demirdache  and  Uribe-Extebarria’s  definition  of 
PROGRESSIVE aspect as “a spatio-temporal predicate with the meaning 
of  (with)in:  it  orders  the  AST  within  the  event  time”.  This  definition  is 
consistent with the behavior of Progressive-marked verbs in SLQZ. 

In  past  progressive  constructions,  PAST  tense  orders  UT  after  AST. 
PROG locates AST within the time of the event (between t1, the time the 
event begins, and t2, the time the event ends, in the timeline below): 

6.7  “Pure” Aspect Markers in SLQZ 

235 

80. 
 

t1

AST t2 UT

___|_______|____|___|__________

….ET…..

 
Future  progressives  are  derived  similarly:  FUTURE  tense  orders  UT  

before AST, which is located inside the event time:    

 81.
 
__________|___|______|______|___

AST

t2

UT

t1

….ET…..

 
SLQZ also allows certain stative predicates that can receive stage-level 

interpretations to appear in the progressive:    

 
82.  Ca-cye’tlààa’z Li’eb 
prog-be.happy Felipe 
 
 
“Felipe is happy” (right now) 
 
Such constructions are consistent with the definition of PROGRESSIVE 
given above because they denote temporary (temporally bounded) states: 
AST may pick out a time between the two temporal endpoints of the state. 
Crucially, stative constructions with Progressive-marked verbs do not re-
ceive habitual interpretations. 

This  is  also  consistent  with  the  behavior  of  Progressive  marking  of  
statives in English: only predicates that can denote temporary states may 
appear  with  Progressive  morphology,  and  like  their  SLQZ  counterparts, 
can  only  refer  to  states  occuring  during  a  single  interval  of  time,  rather 
than habitual states of being: 

83.  Glenn is being silly 
 
84.  *Glenn is being bald 

6.7.2 The Neutral Aspect Marker 

The Neutral aspect marker is lexically selected by a small number of loca-
tional and stative predicates. Like the Progressive marker, it may be used 
to express past, present, or future states: 

85.  ø-zùub  zhye’eht loh mee’s chih b-zêiny-a’ 
 
 
 

neut-sit cat         on table    when perf-arrive-1s 
“The cat was seated on the table when I arrived” 

236      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

neut-sit cat         on table    when irr-arrive-1s 
“The cat will be seated on the table when I arrive” 

86.  ø-zùub  zhye’eht loh mee’s chih y-zêiny-a’ 
 
 
 
When  embedded  under  Past-interpreted  matrix  clauses,  it  receives  a 
double-access reading similar to that of Habitual complements of past ma-
trix  clauses:  the  complement  clause  event  is  interpreted  as  simultaneous 
with  both  the  matrix  clause  past  event  time  (the  time  of  saying)  and the 
matrix clause utterance time:    

Oaxaca neut-exist Felipe neut-say Mike yesterday  
“Mike said yesterday that Felipe is in Oaxaca” 

87.  Ldùu’ah  n-u’uh Li’eb ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly nài’ 
 
 
 
88.  Nài’ ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  n-u’uh Li’eb 
 
 
 
These  sentences  can  only  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  Felipe  is  still  in 
Oaxaca at the time the sentence is spoken; they cannot mean that Felipe 
had been in Oaxaca yesterday and is back now. 

yesterday neut-say Mike Oaxaca neut-exist Felipe 
“Mike said yesterday that Felipe is in Oaxaca” 

Like the Habitual marker, the Neutral marker may also be used on verbs 

with present perfect readings: 

top perf-be two year neut-exist Mike Oaxaca 
“Mike has lived in Oaxaca for two years” 

 
89.  A g-uhc tyo’p iihahz n-u’uh Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  
 
 
The Neutral marker is predominantly used to express states, rather than 
actions.  In  examples  (85-86),  the  cat  can  only  be  interpreted  as  being 
seated  before,  during,  and  after  the  time  of  the  speaker  arriving.  In  con-
trast,  the  Habitual,  Progressive,  Perfective,  or  Definite  aspect  markers 
would be used to express the actual act of the cat sitting: 

90.  Yra’ta gwèel chih   r-zëiny-a’     r-zùub  zhye’eht  loh mee’s  
all       time   when hab-arrive-1s hab-sit   cat           on table 
 
 
“Every time I arrive, the cat sits on the table” 
 
91.  Chih b-zëiny-a’      ca-zùub  zhye’eht  loh mee’s 
 
 

when perf-arrive-1s prog-sit   cat         on table 
“When I arrived the cat was sitting (seating herself)  
on the table” 

6.7  “Pure” Aspect Markers in SLQZ 

237 

 
92.  Chih b-zëiny-a’      b-zùub  zhyee’t  loh mee’s 
when perf-arrive-1s perf-sit  cat         on table 
 
 
“When I arrived, the cat sat on the table” 
It seems to be  that all verbs (with the exception of the reduced copula 
nàa)    that  allow  Neutral  aspect  marking  also  have  Habitual  forms  with 
telic, inchoative readings. The converse, however, is not the case.  

A  possible  exception  to  this  is  the  case  of    nnaa    “say”.  A  plausible  
explanation  for  this  is  that  nnaa    is  not  interpreted  as  an  eventive  verb  
(like “utter”) but as a verb reflecting belief  (much like English “assert”). 
Suggestive evidence for this idea comes from the fact that use of nnaa is 
dispreferred in contexts in which the speech act itself is emphasized: 

93.  Chonn gwèell w-nii/?ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly  
 

three times    perf-say/?neut-say Mike 
“Mike said three times 

 

 
 

r-zeeblààa’z Gye’eihlly Lia Oliieb. 
hab- like            Mike     Ms. Olivia 
that he likes Olivia” 

The Tense and Aspect Features of the Neutral Marker 
The Neutral marker shows conflicting evidence for the presence of tense. 
On one hand, Neutral verbs in the complements of past-interpreted clauses, 
like Habitual verbs, receive double-access readings (as seen in  (87) and 
(88)), which suggests the Neutral marker is a PAI, and needs to be licensed 
by PRESENT tense. The potential PAI status of the Neutral  marker is fur-
ther supported by its use in present perfect constructions. Like Habitual-
marked verbs, Neutral-marked verbs may receive present perfect readings 
in the presence of a time expression introduced by a past copula. The pre-
sent perfect reading for Habitual verbs in this context was analyzed as a 
double-access  reading  resulting  from  the  need  for  the  Habitual  verb  to 
raise out of the scope of the past-interpreted verb introducing the time ex-
pression.  The  use  of  the  Neutral  aspect  in  this  context  suggests  that  the 
Neutral marker, like the Habitual marker, is a PAI that must move out of 
the scope of the past copula. 

The  Neutral  marker,  however,  also  appears  in  contexts  incompatible 
with its potential PAI status. As seen in (94), repeated below, clauses with 
Neutral-marked verbs may be used to express past states: 

neut-sit cat         on table    when perf-arrive-1s 
“The cat was seated on the table when I arrived” 

94  ø-zùub  zhye’eht loh mee’s chih b-zêiny-a’. 
 
 
 
This sentence is interpreted to mean that the cat was already seated at 
the  time  of  the  speaker’s  arrival.  It  does  not  necessarily  mean,  however, 
that the cat is still seated at the time the sentence was spoken (although this 

238      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

reading  may  be  pragmatically  possible).  Thus,  this  sentence  cannot  be 
treated as a “double-access” case, as can (87). If the Neutral marker were 
indeed  a  PAI,  this  double-access  reading  would  be  required,  and    past 
readings such as that in (94) would be impossible. 

The possibility I will consider is that the Neutral marker, like the Pro-
gressive marker, is in fact a solely aspectual marker rather than a reflex of 
PRESENT or PAST tense. The apparent double-access readings that arise 
when Neutral clauses are embedded under certain past-interpreted clauses 
result from the aspectual features, rather than tense features, of the Neutral 
marker. 

The first hint as to why apparent double-access readings result is the fact 
that the Neutral marker (with the possible exception of “say”) only appears 
on  atelic,  stative  predicates.  Because these  stative  predicates have no in-
herent endpoints, a state that is said to have held in the past can be natu-
rally interpreted as still holding in the present. Pragmatic factors can affect 
this interpretation, however, as seen by the possible readings of (94). 

This raises the question of what factors in the semantics of the Neutral 
marker restrict it to stative and locational predicates. In other words, how  
does 
in  expressing  ongoing 
states/events? 

the  Habitual  marker 

it  differ  from 

A  potential  hint  comes  from  Stubblefield  and  Stubblefield’s  (1991) 
analysis of  an analogous form in Mitla Zapotec (MZ) : they  treat the na- 
prefix on stative predicates in MZ (cognate to the SLQZ Neutral form) as a 
marker of “stative mood” that “replaces aspectual prefixes” (p. 225). They 
also gloss stative predicates with na-prefixes  as “is-V”or “be-V”: 

95.  Golgisah-re gideb jeh na-ga-sah-ni       ro?      te biliää 
 
Golgisah-this all day is-lying-back-his mouth one cave 
“This Golgisah spent all his time lying in the entrance of a cave”  
 
 
(Mitla Zapotec: Stubblefield and Stubblefield 1994, p. 5) 
An earlier analysis of MZ (Briggs 1961) likewise treats the na-  prefix 
on stative predicates as a reduced copula, rather than a separate stative a 
spectual form corresponding to the SLQZ Neutral aspect . 

A similar account may hold for the SLQZ Neutral marker. Suggestive 
evidence for this comes from the behavior of the reduced copula nàa “be”, 
the only verb that takes only Neutral marking. The absence of a Habitual 
form  for  nàa  “be”  (and  its  limited  morphology—it  cannot  cooccur  with 
pronominal subject agreement markers, nor can it appear with other aspect 
markers) makes it a likely historical source for the Neutral marker. If the 
Neutral aspect marker in SLQZ is indeed derived from a reduced copula, 
this would account for its limited distribution: it  historically only appeared 
with  adjectival  and  nominal  (that  is,  stative)  predicates,  and  this  is  still  
reflected in its current usage. 

The origin of the Neutral marker as a copula may also be reflected in its 
aspectual features. A standard function of a copula is to establish an  iden-

6.7  “Pure” Aspect Markers in SLQZ 

239 

tity relation between an entity and a state. Under D&U’s account, aspect 
serves  to  establish  a  spatio-temporal  relationship  between  a  highlighted  
period of time (AST, the assertion time) and an event time. If the Neutral 
marker is a copula reanalyzed as an aspect marker, then the Neutral aspect 
can be defined as a spatiotemporal predicate establishing an identity rela-
tion between AST and ET. Thus AST=ET. Since the Neutral marker only 
appears on stative, atelic predicates, the event time is simply the period of 
time  during  which  the  state  holds. This results in the Neutral marker re-
flecting  an  identity  relation  between  AST  and  a  state.  Thus,  the  Neutral 
marker expresses the existence of an ongoing state.  

The  Neutral  aspect,  then,  differs  from  the  Habitual  aspect  in  several 
ways. While both can be used to express the existence of ongoing states, 
the  Neutral  aspect  cannot  be  used  to  express  non-continuous  (repeated) 
events  or  states.  Recall  that  Habitual-marked  verbs  may  denote  repeated 
actions and events because HAB marks AST as containing an event time 
or set of event times. Since NEUTRAL aspect, in contrast, marks an iden-
tity relation between AST and ET, a single AST cannot describe more than 
one event or state. Also, while the Habitual marker is necessarily licensed 
by  PRESENT  tense  and  may  not  remain  within  the  scope  of  PAST,  the 
Neutral marker has no tense features of its own, and thus may be used to 
express past, present, or future events. 

This brings us back to the eventive use of the Habitual aspect on certain 
stative predicates: as seen in (90), repeated below, when the Habitual as-
pect is used with predicates that allow use of the Neutral aspect, the predi-
cate receives an eventive, rather than stative, reading: 

all     time   when hab-arrive-1s neut-sit cat on table 
“Every time I arrive, the cat is seated on the table” 

96.  Yra’ta gwèel chih  r-zëiny-a’      
 
all     time   when hab-arrive-1s 
“Every time I arrive, 
 
r-zùub  zhye’eht  loh mee’s 
 
 
hab-sit cat on table 
 
the cat sits on the table” 
97.  Yra’ta gwèel chih r-zëiny-a’    ø-zùub  zhye’eht  loh mee’s 
 
 
 
This  contrast  can  also  be  attributed  to  the  different  relations  between 
AST and ET expressed by the Habitual and Neutral aspects. While the Ha-
bitual  marker  may  theoretically  be  used  to  express  both  the  stative  and 
eventive readings of “sit”, the Neutral marker may only express the stative 
meaning. Since the Neutral marker is available to express the stative mean-
ing  and  languages  disprefer  having  more  than  one  inflectional  form  for 
identical  meanings,    the  Habitual  marker  on  predicates  that  may  appear 
with  the  Neutral  marker,  by  default,  expresses  the  non-stative,  eventive 
reading available to the verb. 

240      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

6.8 The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

The  remaining  three  aspect  markers  in  SLQZ—the  Irrealis,  Subjunctive, 
and Definite—encode modal, as well as temporal information. Thus, there 
are contexts in which their distribution and possible interpretation is more 
constrained that that of the other aspect markers. 

I begin this section with a  discussion of the Irrealis aspect marker, since 
this marker shows a clear contrast between its modal and purely temporal 
uses. I will show that in its modal usage, the distribution and interpretation 
of the Irrealis marker correspond closely to the distribution of subjunctive 
mood  in  Romance  and other languages. I will also show that a potential 
conflict between the mood and tense licensing requirements of some Irre-
alis    clauses  provides  more  evidence  that  some  complement  clauses  in 
some tense configurations must raise for anti-polarity reasons. I then dis-
cuss the Subjunctive aspect marker, which I will show to be a past-tense 
counterpart  to  the Irrealis marker. Finally, I  discuss the Definite aspect, 
which  has  the  apparently  puzzling  feature  of  being  able  to  express  both 
emphatic future events, as well as some past events. 

6.8.1 The Irrealis “Aspect” 

Like the other modal aspect markers, the Irrealis marker allows both modal 
and non-modal readings of the verbs it modifies. On its non-modal read-
ing, the Irrealis marker is used to describe future events:4 

irr-sell Mike      car 
“Mike will sell the car” 

98.  Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
On its modal reading (that is, in the complement of  modal and inten-

sional verbs) it has a subjunctive-like reading: 

hab-want irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike wants to sell the car” 

 
99.  R-càa’z     y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
100.  N-àa      pahr   y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly  ca’rr 
 
 

neut-be for     irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike has to sell the car” 

                                                      
4 Much previous literature on tense and modality lists has treated expressions of 
future events as expressions of modality, rather than expressions of tense.  For 
reasons to be made explicit later, I will call the usage of Irrealis aspect in (99) 
“non-modal,”  and  analyse  it as a pure expression of tense and aspect. 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

241 

101.  Z-àa’lle’eh g-ùuny bùunny nadaar rèe’ 
def-allow    irr-do    person   swim  here 
 
 
“Swimming is allowed here” 
 
I will discuss these two different usages in turn, then propose a structure 

that accounts for both uses of the Irrealis marker in a unified fashion. 

Non-Modal Irrealis Constructions 
The non-modal reading of Irrealis-marked verbs occurs obligatorily when 
Irrealis  verbs  appear  in  matrix  clauses,  as  seen  in  (98),    repeated  from 
above:    

irr-sell Mike      car 
“Mike will sell the car” 

 
102.  Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’r. 
 
 
 
In  (102),  the  verb  “sell”  refers to an event assumed to take place at a 
later time in the actual world containing Mike and the speaker. The propo-
sition of Mike selling the car at a later time is presumed to be a real event 
in the real world: the speaker would not have uttered this sentence if she or 
he did not believe it would be true that Mike would sell his car. I have thus 
labelled this reading “non-modal” because the future event described is as-
sumed to be anchored in the actual world of the speaker. 

When embedded under past-interpreted matrix verbs,  Irrealis verbs may 
be interpreted as expressing future tense with regard to the matrix clause 
event time, or future tense with regard to the matrix clause utterance time, 
depending  on  whether  or  not  the  complement  clause  is  embedded  under 
the matrix clause in the overt syntax: 

103.  Nài’        ø-nnaa   Gyeeihly g-wùa’ll Li’eb 
 
yesterday neut-say Mike      irr-sing Felipe 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe would sing” 
 
[F.sings after “saying”, either   before or after UT] 

 

 
104.  G-wùa’ll Li’eb ø-nnaa   Gye’eihlly nài 
 
 

irr-sing   Felipe neut-say Mike yesterday 
“Mike said yesterday Felipe will sing” 
 
[F. can only be interpreted as singing after UT] 

Irrealis-marked  verbs  embedded  under  other  Irrealis-marked  verbs  re-

ceive future-shifted, rather than simultaneous, readings: 
105.  Yzh:ii       y-nìi   Gye’eihlly g-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb 
 
 
 

tomorrow irr-say Mike         irr-sick       Mike 
“Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe will be sick   
[F. can only be sick after Mike says so, not at the same time] 

242      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Non-modal Irrealis, then, seems to show Tense features as well. When 
embedded under a past-interpreted clause, Irrealis can be interpreted as or-
dered after the event time of the matrix clause. When fronted, it can only 
be interpreted as ordered after the matrix clause utterance time, since it is 
out of the governing range of the matrix clause. 

Modal Irrealis Constructions 
When embedded under modal and intensional verbs, Irrealis-marked verbs 
receive a slightly different interpretation and are subject to additional con-
straints  on  movement  and  temporal  interpretation.  These  constraints  will 
prove to be a useful diagnostic for the tense and aspect features of the Irre-
alis marker. 

Repeated below are some examples of Irrealis verbs with modal inter-

pretations: 

hab-want    irr-sell     Mike         car 
“Mike wants to sell the car” 

neut-be  for     irr-sell     Mike         car 
“Mike has to sell the car” 

106.  R-càa’z     y-t òo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr  
 
 
 
107.  N-àa      pahr   y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly  ca’rr 
 
 
108.  Z-àa’lle’eh g-ùuny bùunny nadaar rèe’ 
def-allow    irr-do    person   swim  here 
 
 
“Swimming is allowed here” 
 
In contrast to the non-modal Irrealis examples, the Irrealis-marked verbs 
here describe not actual events assumed to take place at some future time, 
but  only  potential  events  that  may  or  may  not  take  place.  A  speaker  
uttering  (99),  for  instance,  makes  no  claim  about  whether  nor  not  Mike 
will actually sell the car. 

This use of the Irrealis aspect syntactically and semantically resembles 
subjunctive constructions in Romance (and other) languages. The class of 
verbs that subcategorizes Irrealis complements in SLQZ closely parallels 
the class of verbs that subcategorize subjunctive complements in other lan-
guages.  Farkas  (1992a  and  1992b)  notes  that    predicates  requiring  
subjunctive  complements  in  Hungarian,  Romanian,  and  French  fall  into 
four classes: directives (such as “tell”), desideratives (e.g., “want”), deon-
tics  (e.g.  “must”),  and  epistemics  “expressing  remote  possibility”  
(Farkas 1992a, p. 208) or “expressing neutral/negative commitment” (Far-
kas 1992b, p. 73) (such as “be impossible”and “doubt”). These classes of 
predicates likewise require Irrealis complements in SLQZ: 

109.  R-e’ihpy-a’ Gye’eihlly y-tòo’oh ca’rr 
 
 

hab-tell-1s Mike        irr-sell car 
“I told Mike to sell the car” 

(directive) 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

243 

neut-be for     irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike has to sell the car”  (deontic)   

hab-want-1s irr-sell Mike car 
“I want Mike to sell the car”    (desiderative) 

 
110.  R-càa’z-a’ y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
111.  N-àa      pahr   y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly  ca’rr 
 
 
 
112.  Cë’ity r-liuw-dya’ y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr. 
 
 
 
Furthermore,  the  interpretation  of  Irrealis  verbs  in  these  contexts  is  
identical to that posited for subjunctive clauses. The semantic function of 
subjunctive clauses can be most clearly seen when contrasted with that of 
indicative clauses. 

neg   hab-be.likely-dya’ irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike is unlikely to sell the car”   (negative commitment) 

Farkas  (1992a  and  199b)  defines  the  difference  between  contexts  that 
introduce  subjunctive  clauses  in  Romance  and  Hungarian  and  those  that 
introduce  indicative  complements  in  terms  of  possible  world  semantics.  
Indicative clauses, in her terms, introduce propositions that are assumed to 
be true in the actual world inhabited by the speaker and listeners. In (113), 
for  instance,  the  complement  of  “say”,  “has  left”,  appears  in  indicative 
mood: 

113.  Ion a spus ca Maria a plecat 
 

Ion has said that Maria has left   
(Romanian: Farkas 1992b, p. 70) 

Here, the speaker is reporting Ion’s assertion (assumed to be true) that 
Maria  has  left.  Because  such  propositions  are  assumed  to  be  true  in  one 
specific  world,  they  are  considered  to  exist  in  a  “modally  specific  envi-
ronment” (Farkas 1992a, p. 214).  

Subjunctive  clauses,  in  contrast,  denote  not  actual  events  in  the  real 

world, but only potential events: 

 
114.  Necessito que m’ajudis 
 
 
This is the same function served by modal Irrealis complements in (109-

need.1sg that me-help.sub.pres.2sg 
“I need you to help me” (Catalan: Quer 1998, p. 43) 

112). 

The contexts in which propositions expressed with subjunctives appear 
are, in Farkas’ terms, “modally non-specific” (Farkas 1992a, p. 215): that 
is, they are not assumed to be true in any specific world (such as the actual 
world of the speaker), but only in a set of possible worlds. 

244      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

The  two  uses  of  Irrealis-marked    verbs,  then,  can  be  distinguished  in 
terms of modal specificity and non-specificity.  As previously noted, Irre-
alis verbs used to describe future events in examples such as (98) assume 
the  eventual  occurence  of  such  an  event  in  the  actual  world.  Thus,  they  
introduce propositions into modally specific environments. Because their 
interpretation is constrained to the actual world, I have called such uses of 
the Irrealis “non-modal”. 

In  contrast,  the  propositions  expressed    by  Irrealis-marked  clauses  in  
(109-112)  clearly  appear in modally non-specific contexts. Because their 
truth value is not fixed in the actual world, I have labelled such uses of the 
Irrealis as “modal”. 

A second parallel between modal Irrealis constructions and subjunctive 
constructions is their distribution in sentences with more than one embed-
ded clause. Quer (1998) notes that  subjunctive mood is only marked on 
immediately  embedded  complements  of  intensional  predicates:  if  more 
than  one  clause  is  embedded  under  a  subjunctive-triggering  matrix  
predicate, only the first of the embedded clauses appears with subjunctive 
marking. He gives the following example (among others) from Catalan: 

 

115.  Vull [que creguin [que ens agrada]] 
            want.1SG that believe.SUB.3PL that us please.IND.3SG 
 

“I want them to believe that we like it”        (Quer 1998, p. 36) 

Here,  only  the  immediate  complement  of  “want”  appears  with  

subjunctive marking.  

The same constraint holds in SLQZ: 

116.  R-càa’z   Gye’eihlly y-nnìi Gye’eihlly doctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly 
 
 

hab-want Mike         irr-say Mike         doctor neut-be Mike 
“Mike wants to say that he is a doctor” 

Here, the Irrealis marker only appears on the first verb embedded under 
the intensional predicate “want” (“say”). A non-modal aspect marker, the 
Neutral marker, appears on the complement of “say”.  

A third parallel between modal Irrealis and subjunctive constructions is 
suggested  by  the  fact  that  Irrealis  complements  of  intensional  verbs  and 
modals cannot be preposed: 

 irr-sell Mike car neut-be for     
“Mike has to sell the car” 

117.  *Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly  ca’rr n-àa  pahr   
 
 
 
118.  *G-ùuny bùunny nadaar rèe’ z-àa’lle’eh 
 irr-do    person   swim  here def-allow    
 
 
“Swimming is allowed here” 
 
This  suggests  that  Irrealis  complements  with  modal  readings  must  re-
main  under  the  scope  of  the  matrix  predicates  that  select  them.  This  is 
analogous to the scopal requirements of Italian subjunctive clauses noted 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

245 

by Brugger and D’Angelo (1994): they note that intensional verbs such as 
desiderare “want” may take either subjunctive or indicative verbs as com-
plements. However, indefinite nominals in the complements of intensional 
verbs receive different scope readings depending on whether or not they 
appear in  subjunctive or indicative clauses (examples from Brugger and 
D’Angelo 1994, p. 12): 

“Gina wants (to) marry a man who is (Ind.) rich” 
E(x) [rich-man](x) Gina wants [Gina marries x] 

119.  Gina desidera sposare un uomo che è ricco 
 
 
 
120.  Gina desidera sposare un uomo che sia ricco 
 
 

“Gina wants (to) marry a man who is (subj.) rich” 
Gina wants [E(x) [rich-man](x) & Gina marries x]        

Thus, indefinites in indicative complements of Italian intensional verbs 
obligatorily  receive  wide-scope  readings    (in  (119),  Gina  has  a  specific 
rich  man  in  mind)  while  indefinites  in  subjunctive  clauses  under  inten-
sional  verbs  only  receive  narrow-scope  readings  (in  (120),  Gina  wants  a 
rich man to exist for her to marry, but does not assert the existence of such 
an individual). 

Brugger  and  D’Angelo  account  for  this  asymmetry  as  follows:  They  
assume  that  predicates  that  allow  subjunctive  complements  contain  an  
intensional  operator,  located  in  the  head  of  the  predicate  (that  is,  in  V). 
Subjunctive  verbs  are  polarity  items  that  must  remain  within  the  scope  
of  this  operator.  Indicative  verbs,  on  the  other  hand,    are  “Anti- 
Intensional-Operator Polarity Items” that cannot appear within the scope of 
 intensional  operators.  Thus,    indefinites  in  subjunctive  complements  of  
intensional  verbs  necessarily 
the  
subjunctive clause cannot raise out of the scope of the matrix clause inten-
sional operator. Conversely, indicative complements of  intensional verbs 
must  raise  out  of  the  scope  of  the  matrix  intensional  operator,  so  any  
indefinite  that  appears  in  such  a  complement  will  receive  a  wide-scope 
reading. 

receive  narrow  scope  because 

If  this  account  is  correct,  it  likewise  explains  the  inability  of  Irrealis-
marked verbs in SLQZ to be raised out of intensional matrix clauses: Irre-
alis verbs with modal readings are a reflex of subjunctive mood, and thus 
are expected to be subject to the same syntactic and semantic constraints as 
subjunctives crosslinguistically. 

 More on the Distribution of Modal Irrealis Verbs    
    Modal Irrealis verbs most commonly  appear as complements of Habit-
ual and Neutral-marked intensional predicates: 

 

 

246      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

“Mike wants to help us” 

121.  R-cààa’z Gye’eihlly g-ahcnèe dannuan 
           hab-want  Mike         irr-help    us 
 
 
122.  N-àa      pahr   y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly  ca’rr 
 
 
They  may  also  appear  as  complements  of  Progressive-marked  predi-

neut-be for     irr-sell Mike car 
“Mike has to sell the car”   

cates, including those with past or future progressive meanings : 

prog-ask    Ms. Olivia  Felipe irr-dance Felipe  
“Olivia is asking Felipe to dance” 

123.  Cay-e’ihpy Lia Oliieb Li’eb  y-gyàa’ Li’eb 
 
 
 
124.  Cay-e’ihpy Lia Oliieb Li’eb y-gyàa’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125.  A cay-e’ihpy Lia Oliieb  Li’eb y-gyàa’ Li’eb  
 
 
 

prog-ask    Ms. Olivia  Felipe irr-dance 
“Olivia was asking Felipe to dance 
Li’eb chih b-zëihny Gye’eihlly 
Felipe when perf-arrive Mike 
when Mike arrived” 

top prog-ask   Ms. Olivia  Felipe irr-dance Felipe 
“Olivia will be asking Felipe to dance 

chih y-zëihny-a’ 
when irr-arrive-1s 
when I arrive” 

 
 

 Modal  Irrealis  verbs  may also appear under Perfective-marked matrix 
predicates. They may only do so, however, when interpreted as referring to 
potential  events  in  the  future  with  regard  to  UT,  rather  than  potential 
events ordered in the future with regard to the past ET: 

  “Mike wanted to help us” 

  126.  *Guhclààa’z Gye’eihlly g-ahcnèe dannuan 
           perf-want       Mike        irr-help    us 
 
  127.  Nài’        g-uhclààa’z-a’ lààa’ Gye’eihlly gw-ùall  
 
   yesterday irr-want-1s      foc     Mike        irr-sing 
   “Yesterday, I wanted Mike to sing 
   
 lohoh laanih nih  g-ahc stux:maan 
         at      party   REL irr-be next.week 

 at the party next week” 

  
 
Complements of Perfective intensional verbs appear with the Subjunc-

tive aspect marker when referring to potential events in the past: 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

247 

128.  Guhclààa’z Gye’eihlly ny-ahcnèe dannuan 
         perf-want    Mike       subj-help    us 
 
The Subjunctive aspect will be discussed in Section 7.3. 

“Mike wanted to help us” 

 

The Syntactic Representation of Mood    
This raises the question of how  modal and non-modal Irrealis verbs are 
distinguished syntactically: that is, why can’t Irrealis-marked verbs in ma-
trix clauses receive modal readings, and what blocks Irrealis-marked com-
plements of intensional verbs from receiving non-modal readings? 

The  difference  is  the  presence  or  absence  of  syntactic  and  semantic 
Mood.  Assuming  Brugger  and  D’Angelo’s  account  is  correct,  the  
expression of subjunctive mood requires the presence of both a subjunctive 
operator (provided by an intensional predicate) and subjunctive mood itself 
in the embedded clause.  

I will thus assume that Irrealis verbs with modal readings raise into the 
pre-TP MoodP projection, while Irrealis verbs with non-modal readings do 
not.  Modal  readings  of  matrix  clause  Irrealis  verbs  are  blocked  because  
there would be no licensing operator available for subjunctive mood. 

Evidence  for    movement  of  modal  Irrealis  verbs  into  MoodP  comes 
from the obligatory modal reading of Irrealis verbs under ordinary clausal 
negation.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  contrast  between  two  possible negated  
Irrealis complements of rei’hpy “tell”.  SLQZ  re’ihpy   may be used either 
as  a  declarative  (introducing  an  indicative  complement)  or  a  directive  
(introducing a subjunctive complement): 

 
129.  R-e’ihpy Pa’amm laarëng 
hab-tell    Pam   3p.prox    
 
 
“Pam told them 
 
 
 
 
 
130.  R-e’ihpy Pa’amm laarëng cë’ity g-ùa’ll-dya’-rëng li’ebr  
 
 

cë’ity-dya-rëng     g-ùa’ll-rëng li’ebr  yzhìi 
neg-dya’-3p.prox irr-read-3p-book tomorrow 
they will not read the book tomorrow” 

hab-tell    Pam   3p        neg   irr-read-dya’-3p  book 
“Pam told them not to read the book” 

Recall from Chapters 3 and 4 that in normal clausal negation, the nega-
tive quantifier cë’ity precedes, and the variable dya’ follows, the verb. As 
was noted in Chapter 3, however, this structure is disallowed with Irrealis 
verbs with non-modal interpretations, and the alternate negation structure 
that appears in (129) is used instead.  

248      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Under  normal  clausal  negation,  Irrealis  verbs  obligatorily  get  modal 
readings. Such a reading in seen in the complement clause of (130), where 
the  matrix  clause  verb  re’ihpy  “tell”  is  used  as  a  directive.  This was ac-
counted for in Chapter 4 in the following way: movement of a negated VP 
out of TP into NegP passes though MoodP. When MoodP is inactive (as in 
the  case  of  the  non-modal  aspects)  such  movement  has  no  interpretive  
effect. Since Irrealis verbs may trigger Mood, however, movement of an 
Irrealis verb through MoodP forces a modal reading. The non-modal read-
ing  of  the  negated  Irrealis  verb  in  (129)  is  preserved  by  embedding  the 
 Irrealis verb under a covert existential verb that itself undergoes negation. 

6.8.2 The Tense and Aspect Features of Irrealis Aspect 

Now I turn to the formal definition of the tense and aspectual features of 
the Irrealis aspect. As seen in the preceding discussion, Irrealis aspect is 
used to describe potential  events or states. On its non-modal usage, Irrealis 
aspect  describes  acts  the  speaker  assumes  will  take  place  in  the  actual 
world. On its modal usage, it describes potential acts in sets of alternate 
worlds.  

Thus,  the  Irrealis  aspect  in  both  its  modal  and  non-modal  functions 
highlights  intervals  of  time  before  the  initiation  of  an  event.  I  will  thus  
define IRR aspect as ordering AST before ET:  

131.   
 

TP

UT

T’

ASPP

T
?

AST

ASP’

IRR

VP

(before)

...t1...t2...

This  leaves  the  question  of  the  definition  of  tense  features  for  Irrealis 
aspect. This issue is complicated by the fact that modal and non-modal Ir-
realis verbs show different ranges of temporal interpretation.  Non-modal 
Irrealis verbs embedded under past-interpreted matrix clauses, for instance, 
may describe events ordered in the future after the matrix clause past ET 
but  before  UT  ((132),  repeated  from  above),  while  modal  Irrealis  verbs 
under past-interpreted matrix clauses may not  (133): 

132.  Nài’  ø-nnaa Gyeeihly g-wùa’ll Li’eb 
 
 
 

yesterday neut-say Mike irr-sing Felipe 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe would sing” 
 
[F.sings after “saying”, either before or after UT] 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

249 

133.  Nài’ g-uhclààa’z-a’ lààa’ Gye’eihlly  
 
 
 

yesterday perf-want-1s  foc Mike 
“Yesterday, I wanted Mike 

gw-ùall lohoh laanih nih g-ahc stux:maan 
irr-sing     at  party REL irr-be next.week 
to sing at the party next week” 

 
 
Up  to now, I have tacitly assumed that the two uses of Irrealis aspect 
differ  only  in  their  modal  features.  However,  data  such  as  these  suggest 
that  they  differ  in  their  tense  features  as  well.  The  possibility  of  past-
shifted future readings in non-modal Irrealis complement clauses indicates 
that the complement clause tense may take the matrix clause ET as its ex-
ternal  temporal  argument,  and  thus  may  take  scope  under  matrix  clause 
PAST  tense.  Thus,  the  non-modal  Irrealis  marker  is  not  a  PAI.  The  fact 
that the non-modal Irrealis marker can appear outside the scope of PAST  
tense  (and  obviously,  does  not  independently  encode  PAST)  shows  it  is 
not  a  PPI,  either.  Thus,  it  encodes  neither  PRESENT  nor  PAST  tense.  I 
will show that the non-modal Irrealis marker encodes FUTURE tense. 

Yet, identical readings are impossible with modal Irrealis complements 
of past-interpreted intensional predicates. Rather, a double-access reading 
results: in (133), Mike’s singing is interpreted as possible, but not yet initi-
ated both at the matrix clause past ET (yesterday) and at the matrix clause 
UT.  

The obligatory double-access reading of modal Irrealis under PAST is 
reminiscent to that of Habitual under PAST. This suggests that the Irrealis 
marker  in  modal  contexts,  like  the  Habitual  marker,  is  a  PAI  that  must 
raise out of the syntactic scope of PAST at LF, and that the Irrealis marker 
in  modal  contexts,  like  the  Habitual  marker,  must  be  licensed  by 
PRESENT tense. 

In short, the following generalization can be made:    
134. The Irrealis marker is a PAI in modal contexts, but not in 

 non-modal contexts. 

 
I  will  thus  assume  that  the  full  tense  and  aspect  structure  for  modal  

Irrealis aspect is as follows: 

135.   
 
        

TP

UT

T’

T
during

ASPP

AST

ASP’

 

before

VP

...t1...t2...

250      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

UT/AST

t1

t2

Modal Irrealis: 
 
 136. 
 
       
 
Interpretive evidence  supports the idea of PRESENT tense  in the struc-
tural representation of modal Irrealis aspect. Consider the following exam-
ple: 

______|_________|_______|____

..ET..

137.  Z-àa’lle’eh g-ùuny bùunny nadaar rèe’ 
def-allow    irr-do    person   swim  here 
 
 
“Swimming is allowed here” 
 
This  is  most  naturally  interpreted  to  mean  that  swimming  is  possible 
now (even if nobody is actually swimming at UT). The modal verb allow, 
then, introduces possible worlds in the present time in which swimming is 
possible (though not yet carried out). 

Modal Irrealis under Past Constructions: Evidence for “Covert” 
Overt Movement 
The joint mood and tense requirements of modal Irrealis verbs, however, 
appear to have the potential to conflict with each other. On one hand, the 
Irrealis marker in modal contexts is an intensional polarity item that needs 
to be under the scope of an intensional predicate. On the other hand, it is a 
PAI that cannot remain under the syntactic scope of PAST tense. If both of 
these conditions hold true of modal Irrealis verbs, then sentences such as 
(133) should be illicit: if the modal Irrealis verb is a PAI and raises out of 
the scope of matrix PAST, it also raises (wrongly) out of the scope of the 
matrix intensional predicate. Indeed, Brugger and D’Angelo (1997) argue 
that present subjunctives are disallowed under past-tense intensional predi-
cates    in  Italian  for  these  very  reasons—there  is  no  way  for  the  present 
subjunctive verb to be simultaneously under the scope of the matrix inten-
sional predicate while outside the scope of matrix clause past tense:    

138.  *Gino desiderava sposare una ragazza che sia ricca 
 
 
 

 Gino  wanted     to marry a    girl      who is (subj.) rich  
(Brugger and D’Angelo 1997) 

 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

251 

This also holds true when the complement of the past intensional predi-

cate is not a relative clause (Filippo Beghelli, p.c.): 

neg believe-past-1s that Maria be-past-subj. silly 
“I didn’t believe Maria was silly” 

neg believe-past-1s that Maria be-pres-subj. silly 
“I didn’t believe Maria is silly”     

 
139.  Non credetti che Maria fosse stupida 
 
 
 
140.  *Non credetti che Maria sia stupida 
 
 
 
This raises two questions: first, what allows modal Irrealis verbs to ap-
pear under past matrix clauses in SLQZ, and second, if embedded Irrealis 
clauses  are  allowed  to  raise  out  of  the  matrix  clause  at  LF  (thus  forcing 
their  reading  as  future  with  regard  to  the  matrix  clause  utterance  time), 
what blocks them from raising overtly out of the scope of the matrix predi-
cate? 

There are two possible strategies that would allow modal Irrealis com-
plements of Past matrix clauses. The first, and simpler, possibility is that 
the  modal  Irrealis  complement  raises  at  LF,  and  for  whatever  reason  is 
blocked from raising overtly. Another possibility is that the Irrealis com-
plement clause does raise overtly (141), then the matrix clause raises again 
past it (142): 

141.  [gw-ùall lohoh laanih nih g-ahc stux:maan]i  
[irr-sing     at    party REL irr-be next.week]i 
      
 
[to sing at the party that will be next week]i 
 

[nài’ g-uhclààa’z-a’ lààa’ Gye’eihlly ti]j 
 [yesterday perf-want-1s  foc Mike   ti]j 
 [yesterday I wanted Mike ti]j 

142.  [nài’ g-uhclààa’z-a’ lààa’ Gye’eihlly  ti]j  
[yesterday perf-want-1s  foc Mike ti]j    
 
[yesterday I wanted Mike ti]j 
 
 

[gw-ùall lohoh laanih nih g-ahc stux:maan]i  tj 
[irr-sing     at     party REL irr-be next.week]i tj 
[to sing at the party that will be next week]i tj 

 

   

 
  
 

252      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 
 
 

    This would allow the Irrealis clause to raise out of the scope of matrix 
PAST tense on one hand (141) while remaining under the scope of the ma-
trix predicate on the other (142). That these conditions can be fulfilled in 
different stages of the derivation is consistent with observations earlier in 
this  chapter  about  reconstruction:  double-access  readings  were  treated  as 
the sum of the logical construals of LF and spell-out derivations. 

Although this second option is more costly in terms of the number of 
movement  operations  involved,  there  is  interpretive  and  structural  evi-
dence supporting it. Furthermore, the idea that constituents may undergo 
multiple movement operations that result in the same linear ordering is not 
unprecedented:  Kayne  (1997)  proposes  that  a  number  of  interpretive  
ambiguities in English negation constructions, for example, can better be 
accounted  for  by  multiple  instantiations  of  overt  movement,  rather  than 
single operations of covert movement. Below, I present some of the evi-
dence  for  overt  raising  of  both  the  matrix  and  complement  clauses  in  
modal Irrealis under Past constructions in SLQZ. 

Earlier  in  this  chapter  I  proposed  that  preposed  complement  clauses 
raise  to  the  focus  projection  of  the  higher  clause.  Thus,  if  all  raising  is 
overt in (133), the Irrealis complement clause raises to spec, FocP of the 
Perfective matrix clause (irrelevant projections omitted for clarity): 

143. 

FocPi

TPi

...
tj

VP

nnaa...
said...

 
 In (143), the Perfective clause (at least the part of it below FocP) raises 
and adjoins to  the Irrealis clause. (Below, I assume this movement is to 
FocP of the Irrealis clause): 

CPj

gùa’ll...
irr-sing...

144.   

FocPi

CPj

ti

FocPj

TPi

TPj

VP    ...

nnaa...
said...

gùall...
irr-sing

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

253 

Thus,  FocP  in  both  the  matrix  and  complement  clause  is  filled.  This 
would  mean  that  constructions  that  require  the  availability  of  FocP  in  
either the matrix or complement clause (such as wh-movement) would be 
blocked  in structures such as (131). 

This  prediction  is  partially  borne  out.  While  wh-movement  may  take 
place  out  of  modal  Irrealis  complements  of  Perfective  matrix  verbs,  the  
resulting wh-question gets a different temporal interpretation from its non-
interrogative counterpart. In brief, the Irrealis verb may not be interpreted 
as a PAI, and thus does not need to raise out of the scope of matrix clause 
PAST. 

Consider, for example, the following sentences: 
 
145.  G-uhclààa’z Li’eb y-sëi’dy Gyeeihly  
 
 
 

perf-want    Felipe irr-study Mike 
“Felipe wanted Mike to study 

pahr prweeb nih g-ahc stuxmaan 
for test         REL irr-be next.week 
for the test next week” 

 
 
 
This sentence means that Felipe wanted Mike to study for the test, but 
now either doesn’t want Mike to study or no longer cares if he does. It is 
still possible in the context expressed by this sentence, however, that Mike 
will go ahead and study without Felipe’s prodding. Thus, the Irrealis com-
plement  represents an incompleted event ordered in the future both with 
regard to the UT and the matrix past ET. This  double-access reading indi-
cates  that  the  embedded  clause  raises  out  of  the  scope  of  matrix  clause 
PAST tense at some point in the derivation: only such movement can ac-
count for the Irrealis verb taking UT as one of its external arguments. This 
is consistent with the PAI status of modal Irrealis verbs. 

Now I compare (145) with its counterpart with a Subjunctive comple-

ment: 

 
146.  G-uhclààa’z Li’eb n-sëi’dy Gyeeihly  
 
 
 

perf-want    Felipe subj-study Mike 
“Felipe wanted Mike to study 

pahr prweeb nih g-ahc stuxmaan. 
for test         REL irr-be next.week 
for the test next week” 

 
 

While  this  receives  the  same  English  translation  as  (145),  it  differs  in 
meaning:  it  can  only  mean  that  Felipe  wanted  Mike  to  study,  but  Mike 
didn’t  study.  In  this  case,  the  complement  Subjunctive  verb  receives  a 
counterfactual reading: it describes an incompleted event of studying in the 

254      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

past: there is no possibility that the action may be fulfilled at some later 
time. In short, the Subjunctive aspect differs from the modal Irrealis in that 
it describes potential or incomplete events in the past, rather than in the fu-
ture. 

When  a  wh-question is formed from a modal Irrealis under Perfective 
sentence, however, the Irrealis verb receives an interpretation identical to 
that of a Subjunctive complement of a Perfective verb: 

 

 
 

147. 

Tu g-uhclààa’z-u’ y-sëi’dy pahr prweeb nih g-ahc stuxmaan? 
who perf-want-2s.inf. irr-study for test     REL irr-be next.week 
“Who did you want to study for the test next week?” 

This can only mean “Which person did you want to study for the test, 
 
but  didn’t  study  for  the  test?”  The  complement  clause  thus  receives  the 
same  kind  of  counterfactual  reading  as  the  subjunctive  complement  in 
(146). Despite the presence of the Irrealis marker in the complement, this 
sentence cannot have a meaning analogous to that of its non-interrogative 
counterpart, such as  “Which person did you want to study for the test, but 
don’t want to anymore?” 

In  short,  wh-extraction  from  a  modal  Irrealis  under  Past  construction 
somehow conflicts with the PAI interpretation of the modal Irrealis verb. 
While Irrealis complements may still appear in these contexts, they do so 
without  their  present/future  incompletive  readings,  and  take  on  past  
incompletive  readings  (like  those  of  Subjunctive  verbs)  instead.  It  thus  
appears  that  wh-movement  (which  fills  the  wh-projection  directly  above 
FocP in both the matrix and complement clauses) interferes with the rais-
ing of the Irrealis complement out of the scope of matrix clause PAST. 

  

The Tense Features of the Non-Modal Irrealis Marker        
 
Now I return to the case of non-modal Irrealis under PAST. As seen above, 
it  allows  a  past-shifted  future  reading,  which  indicates  that  the  Irrealis 
marker here is not a PAI, and thus does not need to raise out of the scope 
of matrix PAST tense. Thus, it is fair to assume that PRESENT tense is not 
present in the embedded Irrealis clause. I thus assume that FUTURE tense, 
which orders UT before RT, is present: 

 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

255 

Irrealis under Past: 

148.  Nài’        ø-nnaa   Gyeeihly g-wùa’ll Li’eb 
yesterday neut-say Mike      irr-sing Felipe 
 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe would sing” 
 
 
[F.sings after “saying”, either before or after UT] 
 
 
 

TP

UT

T’

T
after

TP

RT

T’

T
before

ASPP 

AST ASP’

before VP 

...t1...t2...

 

RT AST t1

t2 UT

____|____|____|________|____|_______

(cid:197)

..ET..

(cid:198)

RT=time of “saying”, t1-t2= time of “singing”  
(which could include or follow UT). 
The need for two separate tense specifications for modal and non-modal 
Irrealis aspect poses a number of interesting problems. However, I leave 
this issue for future research. 

6.8.3 The Subjunctive “Aspect” 

Now I turn to the Subjunctive marker, which was described briefly in the 
preceding section. The Subjunctive marker rarely appears on non-negated 
matrix  clause  verbs,  but  when  it  does  appear,  it  describes  incompleted  
actions in the past: 

subj-sell Mike car 
“Mike was going to sell the car (but didn’t)” 

 
149.  N-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly c’arr 
 
 
 
Its more prevalent use in matrix clauses is in the expression of negated 
past events. Expressions that appear with Perfective marking on the verb in 
affirmative form often take Subjunctive-marked verbs when negated: 

256      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

perf-sell Mike car 
“Mike sold the car” 

150.  B-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
151.  Cë’ity n-tòo’oh-dya’ Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
Perfective verbs may also appear in past clausal negation constructions, 

neg    subj-sell-var Mike     car 
“Mike didn’t sell the car” 

even though Subjunctive forms are generally volunteered first: 

 
152.  Cë’ity b-tòo’oh-dya’ Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
My consultant feels there is no difference in meaning between negated 

neg    perf-sell-var Mike     car 
“Mike didn’t sell the car” 

past constructions with Perfective versus Subjunctive marking on verbs. 

The  Subjunctive  “aspect”  also  appears  as  the  complement    of  modals 

and intensional verbs with past readings:  

153.  G-uhclààa’z-a’ n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb 
perf-want-1s subj-beat-1s Felipe 
 
“I wanted to beat Felipe” 
 
 
 
154.  N-àa pahr n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb 
 
 
Thus, the Subjunctive marker appears to be a past-tense analogue to the 
Irrealis marker. I assume, then, that it is licensed in the following configu-
ration: 

neut-be for subj-hit-1s Felipe 
“I should have hit Felipe” 

 
155.   
 
        

UT

TP

T’

T

PAST
(after)

ASPP

AST ASP’

IRR

(before)

VP

...t1...t2...

 
 

 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

257 

Thus, while the Irrealis marker expresses incompleted actions in the pre-
sent or future, the Subjunctive marker expresses incompleted actions in the 
past.  This  structure  reflects  the  allowable  range  of  interpretation of Sub-
junctive-marked verbs. Consider, for example, the following: 

yesterday neut-say Mike subj-sing Felipe 
“Yesterday Mike said Felipe would sing” 

 
156.  Nài’  ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly ny-ùa’ll Li’eb 
 
 
 
One  of  my  consultants  often  translates  subjunctive-marked  verbs  as 
“was supposed to”: He reports that (156) has a possible reading in which  
Mike  said  yesterday  that  Felipe  was  supposed  to  sing  (before  the  time  
of Mike saying so) but the possibility of Felipe singing no longer holds at 
utterance  time.  Thus,  the  Subjunctive-marked  verb  gets  a  past-shifted  
reading here. 

157. 
        

 

TP

UT

T’

T

PAST
(after)

TP

RT

T’

T

PAST
(after)

ASPP

AST

ASP’

ASP
IRR

VP

(before)

…t1…t2…

AST t1

t2 RT UT

ET

 
 
 
RT = time of saying, t1-t2 = time of singing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

258      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

A reading  is  also possible  in  which  Felipe’s singing  was  supposed  to  
take place yesterday (at the same time as “saying”). The simultaneous past-
tense interpretation of the matrix and embedded clauses supports the idea 
that  the  Subjunctive  marker  is  a  PPI  that  may  be  licensed  by  a  higher 
PAST predicate. 

Further  evidence  for  the  PPI  status  of  the  Subjunctive  marker  comes 
from  the  obligatory  past-shifted  readings  of  preposed  Subjunctive  com-
plements of past-interpreted matrix verbs: 

neg     subj-be.sick-dya’    Felipe neut-say Mike yesterday 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe wasn’t sick”  
(Felipe hadn’t been sick before yesterday/ 
*Felipe wasn’t sick yesterday) 

 
158.  Cë’ity ny-ahcxùuw-dya’ Li’eb ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly nài’ 
 
 
 
 
 
This constraint is directly parallel to the obligatory past-shifted readings 
of  preposed  Perfective  complements  of  past-interpreted  verbs.  Earlier  in 
this chapter, I argued that this past-shifted reading results from the simul-
taneous interpretation of both the raised and base-generated copies of the 
Perfective complement, and is actually a type of double-access reading in 
which  the  Perfective  complement  is  interpreted  as  expressing  an  event  
ordered in the past both with regard to the matrix past event time and the 
utterance  time.  The  obligatory  double-access  reading  of  the  Subjunctive 
complement in (158) can be accounted for in the same manner: because the 
Subjunctive  marker,  like  the  Perfective marker, is a PPI, the clause con-
taining  the  Subjunctive  verb  must  contain  PAST  tense  itself  in  order  to  
license the presence of the Subjunctive marker when the clause is fronted. 
The presence of PAST in both the matrix and complement clauses, how-
ever, means the Subjunctive verb will receive a past-shifted reading in its 
base-generated position. When the Subjunctive clause raises, the double-
access reading results, and the apparent past-shifted reading is preserved. 

The structure in (157) also accounts for the interchangeable use of the 
Subjunctive and Perfective markers in clausal negation constructions. Re-
call that the Perfective marker was defined as denoting completed  events 
in  the  past,  while  the Subjunctive denotes incomplete events in the past.  
Thus, negation of an event denoted by a Perfective verb expresses the idea 
that    a  completed  event did not take place—thus, the event wasn’t com-
pleted. On the other hand, negation of an event denoted by a Subjunctive 
verb expresses the idea that an incompleted event did not take place, and 
thus expresses the idea that the event wasn’t initiated. 
 
 
 

 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

259 

In most contexts (such as (151) and (152)), these readings are pragmati-
cally  equivalent—hence, the acceptability (and apparent interchangeabil-
ity)  of both structures. 

Unlike the Irrealis marker, the Subjunctive marker shows no difference 

in tense features when used as a complement of an intensional predicate. 

6.8.4  The Definite Aspect 

The  third  modal  aspect  in  SLQZ  is  the  Definite  aspect,  which  is  mostly 
used to express future events. It has been called the “Definite” aspect be-
cause its use implies a strong degree of speaker presupposition about the 
eventuality of the future action: 

 
159.  S-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr 
 
 
 
Thus, it provides a more emphatic expression of the probability of future 

def-sell Mike car 
“Mike will definitely sell the car” 

events than does the Irrealis marker. 

The  Definite  marker  also  appears  on  a  small  number  of  motion  verbs 
(most commonly with rihah “go” and rìe’d  “come”) with a non-future (of-
ten  past-like)  reading.5  The  “non-future  Definite”  forms  of  “come”  and 
“go” differ slightly in pronunciation from their future Definite forms: 

def-go Mike Oaxaca 
“Mike will go to Oaxaca” 

 
160.  Z-eheh Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  
 
 
 
161.  Z-èe Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  
 
 
 
162.  Z-ìe’d Gye’eihlly laanih 
 
 
 

def-go Mike Oaxaca 
“Mike went to Oaxaca” 

def-come Mike party 
“Mike will come to the party” 

 
 
 
                                                       
5 Black 2004 considers the future and non-future uses of this marker to represent 

two distinct aspectual forms. 

 
 
 

260      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 
 

def-come Mike party 
“Mike came to the party”
 

163.  Z-iìe’d Gyeeihly laanih 
 
 
The  non-future  reading  of  Definite-marked  verbs    differs  in  meaning 
from  the  true  past  sentences  constructed  with  Perfective-marked  verbs. 
While past events expressed with Perfective verbs are understood as being 
fully completed at UT, those expressed with Definite verbs are interpreted 
as being initiated, but not yet fully culminated. This can be seen in the con-
trast between the following: 

perf-go Mike Oaxaca 
“Mike went to Oaxaca (and he’s already back)” 

164.  Gw-èe Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  
 
 
165.  Z-èe Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  
 
 

def-go Mike Oaxaca 
“Mike went to Oaxaca (and he’s still there/ 
hasn’t returned yet)” 

perf-come Mike     party 
“Mike came to the party (he’s already at the party)” 

 
166.  B-ìed      Gye’eihlly laanih 
 
 
 
167.  Z-iìe’d    Gye’eihlly laanih 
 
 

def-come Mike party 
“Mike came/is coming to the party 
 (he’s either on his way, or has just arrived 
but not yet started participating in the party)” 

Because the readings of the Definite-marked verbs above do not reflect 
strictly past-tense events, I will call this usage of the Definite aspect “non-
future” rather than “past”. The difference in meaning between the Definite 
and Perfective forms above suggest a difference in aspectual structure be-
tween the Perfective aspect and the non-future Definite aspect. I will return 
to this issue below. 

The Distribution of the Future Definite Marker 
The  future  Definite  aspect  differs  from  the  Irrealis  aspect  in  its  possible 
tense  interpretations  as  well  as  in  its  propositional  force.  While  Irrealis-
marked verbs under Past matrix clauses may receive past-shifted readings 
(as seen in (103), repeated below), Definite-marked verbs under Past ma-
trix clauses may not: 
 
  
 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

261 

168.   Nài’       ø-nnaa    Gyeeihly g-wùa’ll Li’eb 
 
 yesterday neut-say Mike      irr-sing Felipe 
 
 “Yesterday, Mike said Felipe would/will sing”   
 
 [F.sings after “saying”, either before or after UT] 

yesterday neut-say Mike def-sing Felipe 
“Yesterday, Mike said Felipe will sing”   
[F. sings after UT/*F. sings after “saying but before UT] 

 169.  Nài’  ø-nnaa Gyeeihly z-ùa’ll Li’eb 
 
 
 
 
Thus, while Irrealis-marked verbs may take  past event times as their ex-
ternal  reference  times,  Definite-marked  verbs  may  not.  Rather,  Definite 
verbs may only take the matrix clause UT as their own external temporal 
argument. This suggests that the Definite marker like the Habitual marker, 
is a PAI:  it may not appear under the scope of PAST tense. If this is so, 
then  the  Definite  marker  (at  least  on  its  future  usage),  like  the  Habitual 
marker, can be assumed to be licensed by the presence of PRESENT tense. 
Future Definite verbs are also subject to two other syntactic constraints. 
First, they disallow focus-fronted subjects, as seen in (170), repeated from 
the preceding chapter: 

Mike          def-sell car 
“MIKE will definitely sell the car” 

170.  *Gye’eihlly s-tòo’oh ca’rr 
 
 
 
In Lee 2005,  TPs with future Definite verbs were argued to raise into 
FocP themselves: this movement both blocks the appearance of other fo-
cused constituents, and contributes to the emphatic reading of the sentence: 
the entire event denoted by the sentence is emphasized via movement into 
FocP. 

Second, Future Definite verbs are dispreferred in clausal negation con-

structions: 

neg       def-come-var Mike party 
“Mike won’t come to the party” 

171.  *Cë’ity z-ìe’d-dya’ Gye’eihlly laanih 
 
 
Judgments  on  this  second  point  are  variable:  at  times,  they  are  found 
merely awkward, but in most cases (such as in the example above), they 
are found to be clearly ungrammatical. 

 

 
 

 

262      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 
 
The Distribution of the Non-Future Definite Marker 
Non-future Definite verbs differ in syntactic behavior, as well as meaning, 
from Future Definite verbs. Unlike future Definite verbs, for instance, they 
may appear in sentences with focus-fronted arguments: 

172.  Gye’eihlly z-iìe’d laanih 
 
Mike       def-come party 
“MIKE is coming to the party/ is on his way to the party” 
 
Another, more crucial, difference is that  non-future Definite verbs may 

appear under the syntactic and semantic scope of PAST verbs: 

 
173.  Ba’  rsìi’lly  ø-nàa Li’eb z-iìe’d Gye’eihlly laanih 
this morning neut-say Felipe def-come Mike party 
 
 
“This morming, Felipe said Mike was coming to the party” 
 
This can only mean that Mike was already on his way to the party at the 
time Felipe said so (or earlier). In short, the event denoted by the embed-
ded  Definite  verb  has  to  be  initiated  at  or  before  the  matrix  clause  past 
event time. 

Preposed non-future Definite complements of PAST matrix clauses re-

ceive the same possible interpretations: 

def-come Mike      party   this morning neut-say Felipe 
“This morning, Felipe said Mike was coming to the party” 

174.  Z-iìe’d Gye’eihlly laanih ba’ rsìi’lly ø-nàa Li’eb 
 
 
 
Thus,  unlike  the  Definite  marker  in  future  verbs,  non-future  Definite 
markers  are  not  PAIs,  but  are  rather  PPIs  dependent  on  the  presence  of 
PAST  tense.    When  they  appear  as  matrix  clause  verbs,  non-future  
Definite verbs describe events already initiated, but not yet culminated, at 
UT.  When embedded under PAST matrix clauses, however, they can only 
describe  events  initiated  by  (or  before)  the  matrix  clause  past  ET:  they 
cannot describe events already initiated at UT, but not yet initiated at the 
matrix  clause  ET.    This  suggests  that    non-future  Definite  verbs  under 
PAST matrix clauses are dependent on matrix PAST for their interpreta-
tion.  

I will thus assume that the non-future Definite marker, like the Perfec-
tive marker, is a PPI that must be under the scope of PAST tense. In matrix 
clauses,  the  non-future  Definite  describes  events  initiated  (but  not  yet 
completed) before UT. Under PAST matrix clauses, it describes events ini-
tiated at the matrix clause PAST ET (a SOT reading) or before the matrix  
 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

263 

PAST  ET  (a  past-shifted  reading).  In  the  former  (SOT)  case,  the  
Definite marker is licensed by matrix clause PAST; in the latter, by PAST 
in its own clause. 

Unlike  embedded  Perfective  verbs,  however,  embedded  non-future 
Definite verbs do not appear to lose their possible simultaneous past read-
ings when preposed. This apparent difference results from the difference in 
aspectual  structure  between  the  Perfective  and  Definite  aspects.    While 
Perfective  aspect  highlights  an  AST    following  the  ET  (thus,  an  already 
completed  event),  Definite  aspect  highlights  an  AST  before  an  ET  
(an event that hasn’t been completed).   

Preposed  Perfective  complements  of  PAST  matrix  clauses  describe 
completed events in the past with regard to both the UT and matrix past 
ET (see Section 6.4.3 for the full derivation of this interpretation); the only 
way for the event to be interpreted as completed at both UT and ET is for 
it to be completed by ET (since an event completed at some past time is 
also complete at the present time, but not vice versa).  

In contrast, preposed non-future Definite complements of PAST clauses 
describe    events  that are still incomplete at both UT and the matrix past 
ET.    Events  that  are  still  incomplete  at  a  present  UT  are  necessarily  
incomplete  at  the  past  ET  as  well.  Likewise,  events  interpreted  as  
incomplete at the past ET are also necessarily incomplete prior to the past 
ET.    Thus,  even  non-future  Definite  clauses  containing  their  own  PAST 
tense—and  having  past-shifted  readings  in  their  embedded  positions—
maintain  simultaneous  readings  even  when  preposed  out  of  the  scope  of 
matrix clause PAST. 

Thus,  it  appears  that  PRESENT  tense  must  appear  when  the  Definite 
marker  has  a  future  reading,  while  PAST  tense  must  appear  when  the 
Definite marker has a non-future reading.  
The Aspectual Features of the Definite Marker 

The  Definite  marker,  then,  may  be  licensed  by  either  PAST  or 
PRESENT tense depending on its usage. I assume that the factors uniting 
the future and non-future Definite markers lie in their aspectual and modal 
features. 

As  suggested  above,  Definite-marked  verbs  (on  both  their  future  and 
non-future readings) describe events that haven’t been completed yet, but 
are  strongly  believed  by  speakers  to  be inevitable:  in  the  future  Definite 
case, the event described has not begun yet, but the speaker emphatically 
believes it will occur; in the non-future case, the event is believed by the 
speaker  to  have  been  initiated,  but  not  yet  completed  (and  the  eventual 
completion of the event is assumed). 

I will argue, then, that the aspectual features of the Definite marker are 
identical to those of the Irrealis and Subjunctive:  the Definite marker, like  
 
 

264      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 
 

the Irrealis and Subjunctive, entails ordering the AST before the ET.  AST 
either  overlaps  UT  (in  the  case  of  the  future  Definite,  where  PRESENT  
tense governs the Definite marker) or precedes UT (in the case of the non-
future Definite, where PAST orders UT after AST): 

175. 
Future Definite:    
 

TP

UT

T’

T

PRES
(during)

ASPP

AST

ASP’

 

ASP

(before)

VP

...t1...t2...

UT/AST   

t1           t2 

..ET..

 
176. 
Non-Future Definite:    
 

TP

UT

T’

T

PAST
(after)

ASPP

AST

ASP’

 
 

ASP

(before)

VP

...t1...t2...

AST UT t1

t2

ET

 
 
Note that the future interpretation of the Future Definite is contributed 
not by its tense features (as previously shown, the Future Definite marker 
is a PAI, and thus encodes PRESENT, rather than FUTURE, tense), but by 

6.8  The Temporal Interpretation of the Modal Aspects 

265 

its aspectual features: they denote events yet to be completed. Events yet to 
be completed in the present can be interpreted as future events. 

The Modal Features of the Definite Marker 
Since the tense and aspectual features of the non-future Definite are identi-
cal to those of the Subjunctive, it is reasonable to ask why the Subjunctive 
describes events that were never completed, while the non-future Definite 
describes events that are not completed, but whose eventual completion is 
assumed. Likewise, it is reasonable to ask what contributes the additional 
level  of  speaker  presupposition  to  future  Definites  that  distinguish  them 
from future Irrealis verbs. 

What distinguishes the Definite aspect from the Subjunctive and Irrealis 
is the role of Mood: because Definite-marked verbs describe events speak-
ers feel will necessarily occur, I will argue that they are also licensed by 
Mood features defining these events as necessarily true—that is, in all pos-
sible worlds imagined by the speaker, it is true that the event described by 
the Definite-marked verb will occur: 

 

177. 
        

MoodP

Mood’

Mood
NEC

TP

UT

T’

T

ASPP

PRES/PAST

AST

ASP’

ASP

(before)

VP

...t1...t2...

 
The fact that Definite verbs are marked by Mood as describing necessar-
ily true events accounts for the previously unexplained fact that Definite 
verbs may not be negated. Assuming that clausal negation takes scope over 
entire  events  or  propositions,  rather  than  over  single  constituents,  then 
clausal  negation  involving  a  Definite  verb  would  result  in  negation  of  a 
necessarily true proposition: 

178.  ¬NEC(P) 
 
As is well known, “not necessarily (P)” is logically equivalent to “pos-

sibly not (P)”: 

179.  ¬NEC(P) = POSS¬(P) 

266      6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 

Thus negation over an event defined as necessarily true (as in the case 
of  Definite  verbs  in  SLQZ)  would  result  not  in  emphatic  negation  of  a 
proposition (“definitely not P”), but instead, in a logically weaker negative 
expression (“It is possible that P won’t happen”). 

The presence of Mood not only contributes to the emphatic readings of 
future  Definite  verbs,  but  also  the  “in  progress”  readings  of    non-future 
Definite verbs. Consider again a simple sentence with a non-future Defi-
nite verb, repeated from above:    
180.  Z-èe Gye’eihlly Ldùu’ah  
 
 

def-go Mike Oaxaca 
“Mike went to Oaxaca (and he’s still there/ 
hasn’t returned yet)” 

I  will  argue  that  the  Mood  features  marking  Definite  verb  events  as  
necessarily true forces non-future Definite events to be interpreted as “in 
progress”—while tense and mood situate the AST of the event before the 
event  and  the  UT,  the  necessity  of  the  event’s  being  carried  out  results 
(pragmatically) in the event being seen as already in progress. In short, the 
speaker perceives the agent of the event  (Mike in this case) as necessarily 
intending, at some point in the past, to carry out an action (going to Oax-
aca). From the perspective of the present, then, it must be the case that the 
action of going to Oaxaca is actually being carried out. 

Thus, the necessity features contributed by Mood allow some pragmatic 
flexibility in the aspectual interpretation (that is, the relation between AST 
and ET) of Definite verbs: while AST is ordered before ET in both future 
and  non-future  Definite  verbs,  Mood  allows  non-future  Definites  to  be  
interpreted as if they represented current events in progress.  This is desir-
able because it allows the formal features of Definite aspect (AST ordered 
before ET) to be defined identically for both future and non-future Definite 
verbs. This is necessary in order to maintain the generalization that the fu-
ture  and  non-future  Definite  are,  despite  their  differences  in  temporal 
in
terpretation,  manifestations  of the same aspect and not merely different 
pects that accidentally resemble each other. That the future and non-future 
as
Definite  forms  are  indeed  slightly  different  variants  of  the  same  form  is 
supported by evidence from other Zapotec languages: many of these lan-
guages, like SLQZ, have homologous aspect forms that are used mostly for 
future events, but describe past or current events with “come” and “go”. 

6.9 Summary 

In  this  chapter,  then,  I  have  provided  both  a  descriptive  and  theoretical 
overview  of the expression of tense and aspect in SLQZ. First, I showed 
that SLQZ “aspect” markers may actually encode tense, and that in many 

r
6.9   umma y

S

267 

cases, SLQZ “aspect” markers show the same syntactic and semantic de-
pendencies  that  tense  markers  show  in  overtly  tense-marking  languages 
such as English. I also showed (following Stowell 1993, 1995, and Demir-
dache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997) that TENSE and ASPECT are interact-
ing syntactic predicates that take intervals of time as their arguments, and 
tense/aspect markers are polarity items licensed by (or blocked by) TENSE 
predicates  with  certain  features.  As  a  result,  temporal  interpretation  in 
SLQZ is directly correlated with syntactic structure and can be affected by 
movement. 

I also showed that some SLQZ “aspect” markers encode mood, as well 
as tense. The Irrealis and Subjunctive aspects, for instance, are used in cer-
tain contexts to represent possible world situations; in these contexts, their 
syntactic  and  semantic  distribution  closely  parallel  that  of  subjunctive 
mood  in Romance and other languages. The Definite aspect encodes a dif-
ferent type of modality: that of necessity, rather than possibility. The pres-
ence  of  modal  necessity  in  Definite-marked  events  is  responsible  for  its 
emphatic future readings, as well as its possible usage in the representation 
of initiated, but not yet completed, events. 

A summary of the tense, aspect, and mood features of each of the SLQZ 

aspect markers is below: 

Tense Features 

Aspectual Features  Mood Features 

RT after ET 
RT = ET 
undefined 
undefined 
future:  
RT before ET 
modal: RT = ET 
RT after ET 
future: RT = ET 
non-future: 
RT after ET 

AST after ET 
AST contains ET 
AST within ET 
AST =ET 
AST before ET 

AST before ET 
AST before ET 

Indicative 
Indicative 
Indicative 
Indicative 
future: Indicative 
modal:  
Possibility 
Possibility 
Necessity 

 

 

Aspect 
Marker 
Perfective 
Habitual 
Progressive 
Neutral 
Irrealis 

Subjunctive 
Definite 

 
 

 Table 3. The tense, aspect, and mood features of SLQZ “aspect” markers. 

REFERENCES 

Review  2, 3, 211-236. 

Cambridge 

tic Inquiry  16.3 

HIL 

 
Abusch D (1991)  Sequence of tense revisited: two semantic accounts of tense in 

intensional contexts.  Ms., Universität Stuttgart 

Aoun J, Sportiche D (1983) On the formal theory of government. The Linguistic 

Awberry  GM  (1976)  The  syntax  of  welsh.  Cambridge  University  Press,  

Baker M (1985) The mirror pinciple and morphosyntactic representation. Linguis-

Baker M (1988) Incorporation: a theory of grammatical function changing. Uni-

versity of Chicago Press, Chicago 

Baker M (1996). The polysynthesis parameter. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
Barbiers S (1995) The syntax of interpretation. University of Leiden dissertation. 

Black C (2004) Quiegolani Zapotec syntax: a principles and parameters account.  
SIL  International  and  The  University  of  Texas  at  Arlington  Publications  in 
Linguistics 136. Dallas 

Briggs  E  (1961)  Mitla  Zapotec  grammar.  Instituto  Lingüístico  del  Verano  and 

Centro de Investigaciones Antropólogicas de México, Mexico City. 

Broadwell  GA  (1991)  Santa  Ana  del  Valle--English-Spanish  word  list.  Ms., 

SUNY Albany 

Brugger G, D’Angelo M (1994) “Movement at LF triggered by mood and tense.” 

University of Venice Working Papers in Linguistics, Vol. 4, no. 2. 

Burzio L (1986) Italian syntax: a government-binding approach. Studies in Natu-

ral Language and Linguistc Theory. Kluwer, Dordrecht  

Butler  I  (1988)  Gramática    Zapoteca:  Zapoteco  de  Yetzachi  El  Bajo.    Serie 
Gramática  de Linguas Indigenas de México. Instituto Lingüístico del Verano, 
Mexico City. 

Carnie A (1995) Non-verbal predication and head-movement. Doctoral disserta-

tion,  MIT . MIT working papers in linguistics, Cambridge 

Casillas  V  (1995)  Causative  constructions  in  San  Lucas  Quiaviní  Zapotec.  

Ms., UCLA. 

Cinque    G  (1997)  Adverbs  and  functional  heads:  a  cross-linguistic  perspective.  

Oxford University Press, Oxford 

Chapin P (1978) “Easter Island: a characteristic VSO language.” in Lehman WP, 
ed, Syntactic typology: studies in the phenomenology of language. University 
of Texas Press, Austin 

270      References 

Chierchia G (1995) Individual-level predicates as inherent generics. In Carlson G, 

(ed) The generic book. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 

Chomsky N (1957) Syntactic structures. Mouton The Hague 
Chomsky N (1995) The minimalist program.  MIT Press, Cambridge 
Chomsky N, Lasnik H (1993)  Principles and parameter theory. In Jacobs J, von 
Stechow A, Sternefeld W, Vennemann T (eds) Syntax: an international hand-
book of contemporary research. W de Gruyter, Berlin 

Chung S (1976) Case marking and grammatical relations in Polynesian. Doctoral 

 

Chung S (1990) “VPs and verb movement in Chamorro.” Natural Language and 

dissertation, Harvard  University. 

Linguistic Theory 8:559-619. 

Chung S (1998) The design of agreeement. Chicago University Press, Chicago 
Chung S, Timberlake A (1985) Tense, aspect, and mood. In T. Schopen, editor,  
Linguistic typology and syntactic description III. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 

Comrie B (1985)  Tense. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Davis H, Demirdache D (2000) Two verb-initial systems in one Salish language: 
VSO vs. VOS in Státimcets (Lillooet Salish). Ms., University of British Co-
lumbia 

Demirdache H, Uribe-Exteberria M (1997) The primitives of temporal relations. 
In Martin R, Michaels D, Uriagereka J (eds.) Step by step: essays on minimal-
ist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik.  MIT Press, Cambridge 

den Dikken M (1993) Particles. Doctoral dissertation. HIL. 
Di  Sciullo  AM,  Williams  E  (1988)  On  the  definition  of  word.  MIT  Press,  

Cambridge 

Honolulu 

search 1.1 

Duffield  N (1994) “Are you right? On pronoun-postposing and other problems of 
Irish  word-order.”    In  Aronovich  R,  Byrne  W,  Preuss  S,  and  Senturia  M 
(eds.,) Proceedings of WCCFL 13. 

Elbert  S,  Pukui  MK  (1979)  Hawaiian  grammar.    University  Press  of  Hawaii, 

Emonds J (1980) “Word order and generative grammar.” Journal of linguistic re-

Enç M (1987) Anchoring conditions for tense. Linguistic inquiry 18.4, 633-657. 
Farkas D (1992a)  “Mood choice in complement clauses.” In Kenesei I, Pléh C, 

eds, Approaches to Hungarian, vol. 4: the structure of Hungarian.. JATE 

Farkas  D  (1992b)  “On 

the  semantics  of  subjunctive  complements.”  In 
Hirschbühler P, Koerner K (eds) Romance languages and modern linguistic 
theory. John Benjamins, Amsterdam/Philadelphia 

Foreman J (1999) Preverbal subjects in Macuiltianguis Zapotec. Paper presented 

at the 73rd annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America. 

Grimes  B  (2005)  (ed)  SIL  ethnologue:  languages  of  the  world,  online  edition. 

http://www.ethnologue.com 

Hale K, Keyser SJ (1993)  On argument structure and the lexical expression of 
syntactic relations. In Hale K, Kayser SJ (eds.) The view from building 20; 
essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Bromberger. MIT Press, Cambridge 
Heggie L (1993) The range of null operators: evidence from clefting. Natural lan-

guage and linguistic theory 11:45-48 

      References      271 

Horvath J (1986) FOCUS in the theory of grammar and the syntax of Hungarian. 

Iatridou S (2000) The grammatical ingredients of counterfactuality. Linguistic in-

Foris, Dordrecht 

quiry, 31.2: 321-370. 

Jaeger JJ  (1983) “The fortis/lenis question: evidence from Zapotec and Jawoñ.” 

Journal of phonetics 11:177-189. 

Jaeggli O, Hyams N (1993) On the independence and interdependence of syntac-
tic and morphological properties: English aspectual ‘come’ and ‘go’. Natural 
language and linguistic theory  11.2: 313-346. 

Jones  T,  Knudson  LM  (1977)   Guelavía  Zapotec  phonemes.  In  Merrifield  WR 
(ed)  Studies  in  Otomanguean  phonology.  Summer  Institute  of  Linguis-
tics/UTA. 

Kadmon N, Landman F (1990) Polarity sensitive any and free choice any Ms. Ben 

Gurion University of the Negev and Cornell University. 

Kaufman T (1994) Proto-Zapotec reconstructions. Ms., University of Pittsburgh. 
Kayne R (1994) The antisymmetry of syntax.  MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Kayne R (1997) Overt and covert movement. Ms., New York University. 
Kenesei I (1993) A minimalist program for the syntax of focus. Ms., Department 

Kiss ÉK (1988) Configurationality in Hungarian. Studies in natural language and 

of English, University of Szeged. 

linguistic theory. Reidel. 

Kiss  ÉK  (1994)  Sentence  structure  and  word  order.  In  Syntax  and  semantics,  

vol. 27: The syntactic structure of Hungarian. Academic Press, New York 

Koopman H (1996)  The spec-head configuration. In Garrett E, Lee F, (eds) Syn-

tax at sunset . UCLA working papers in syntax and semantics 1. 

Koopman H, Sportiche D (1991)  The position of subjects Lingua. 
Koopman H, Szabolcsi A (1998) The Hungarian verbal complex: complex verb 

formation as XP movement. Ms., UCLA 

Kural  M  (1996)  Verb  incorporation  and  elementary  predicates.  UCLA  disserta-

tion. 

sity of California, Irvine. 

Kural M (1998) Case licensing and the position of the English verb. Ms., Univer-

Larson R (1988) On the double object construction. Linguistic inquiry 19. 
Lee F (1996) “Aspect, negation, and temporal polarity in Zapotec.” In Agbayani 
B Tang S (eds.) The proceedings of the fifteenth West Coast Conference in 
Formal Linguistics. CSLI Publications, Stanford 

Lee  F (1997) Focus and judgment type in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec. In Pro-

ceedings of BLS 23 

ceedings of CLS 33 

 Lee F (1997b) The predicational nature of clefts: evidence from Zapotec. In Pro-

Lee F (1998) Evidence for tense in a ‘tenseless’ language. In  NELS 29: proceed-

ings from the 29th meeting of the North-East Linguistic Society 

Lee F (2000) VP remnant movement and VSO in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec.  In 
Carnie A,Guilfoyle E (eds) The syntax of verb-initial languages, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford 

Lee F (2003) Anaphoric R-expressions as bound variables. Syntax 6.1, pp 84-114 

 

272      References 

Lee F (2005) Force first: clause fronting and clause typing in San Lucas Quiaviní 
Zapotec. In Carnie A, Harley H, Dooley SA, editors, Verb first: on the syntax 
of  verb-initial  languages.  John  Benjamins  Publishing  Company,  Amster-
dam/Philadelphia 

Lee F, Ouhalla J (1998) “Remnant VP movement and VSO in Quiaviní Zapotec 

and Berber.” Ms., UCLA and Queen Mary and Westfield College. 

López Cruz A (1997) Morphología verbal del zapoteco de San Pablo Güilá. Tesis 
(licenciada  en  lingüístico),  Escuela  Nacional  de  Antropología  e  Historia, 
México, D.F. 

Marks D (undated)  Morphophonemics of the Guevea de Humboldt Zapotec verb. 

Ms., Summer Institute of Linguistics. 

Marlett SA (1993) Zapotec pronoun classification. International Journal of Ameri-

can Linguistics: 59: 82-101. 

Massam  D  (2000)  VSO  and  VOS:  Aspects  of  Niuean  word  order.  In  Carnie 
A,Guilfoyle E (eds) The syntax of verb-initial languages, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford 

McCawley  J  (1988)  The  syntactic  phenomena  of  English.  Chicago  University 

McCloskey J (1991) Clause structure, ellipsis, and proper government in Irish. In 

The syntax of verb initial languages: Lingua special edition 85. 

Moritz L, Valois D (1992)  French sentential negation and LF pied-piping. Lin-

Munro  P  (1995)  Coreference  phenomena  in  San  Lucas  Quiaviní  Zapotec.  Ms. 

Press, Chicago 

guistic inquiry. 

UCLA. 

Munro P (1996)  Making a Zapotec dictionary. Dictionaries  17. 
Munro  P,  Lopez  F  (with  Rodrigo  Garcia  and  Olivia  V.Méndez)  (1999).  Dicyo-
naary x:te:e’n di:I’zh sah Sann Luu’c: San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec dictionary. 
Diccionario  Zapoteco  de  San  Lucas  Quiaviní.  UCLA  Chicano  Studies  Re-
search Center Publications, Los Angeles 

Nakajima T (1996) Remnant VP raising and word  order under the LCA. Paper 

presented at the Sixth Colloquium on Generative Grammar. 

Nellis D, Hollenbach B (1980) Fortis vs. lenis in Cajonos Zapotec phonology. In-

ternational journal of American Llnguistics  49. 

Nkemnji M (1995) Heavy pied-piping in Nweh. Doctoral dissertation, UCLA. 
Noonan  M  (1999)  “What  is  the  nature  of  successive-cyclic  WH-movement?”  

Paper presented at WCCFL 18. To appear in Proceedings of WCCFL 18. 

Nyonyani    D  (1996)    The  morphosyntax  of  applicatives.  Doctoral  dissertation, 

Ogihara  T  (1996)  Tense,  attitudes  and  scope.  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers, 

UCLA 

Dordrecht. 

Ouhalla  J  (1997)  “Remarks  on  focus  in  Standard  Arabic.”  In  Mushira  Eid  and 
Robert Radcliffe, editors, Perspectives on Arabic linguistics X. John Benja-
mins Publishing Company, Amsterdam/Philadelphia 

Partee B (1973) Some structural analogies between tenses and pronouns in Eng-

lish. The journal of philosophy 70. 

Pearson  JM  (1997)  Feature  inheritance  and  remnant  movement:  deriving  SOV  

order under the LCA.  Paper presented at the LSA Summer Institute. 

      References      273 

Press. 

Pesetsky  D  (1995)  Zero  syntax:  experiencers  and  cascades.  Cambridge:  MIT 

Pickett V, Black C, Vicente Marcial C (1998) Gramática popular del zapoteco de 
Istmo.  Centro  de  investigación  y  desarrollo.  Binniza  A.C   and  Instituto 
lingüistico de Verano: Oaxaca and Tucson.  

Pickett, Velma, Cheryl Black and Vicente Marcial C  2001. Gramática popular del 
zapoeco de  Istmo. Online  edition  http://www.sil.org/mexico/zapoteca/istmo/ 
G023a-GramaticaZapistmoZAI.htm 

Pollock  J-Y  (1989)  “Verb  movement,  UG,  and  the  structure  of  IP”  Linguistic  

inquiry  20. 

Potter B (1995) Minimalism and the mirror principle. In NELS 26: proceedings of 

the 26th meeting of the North-East Linguistic Society. Harvard and MIT. 

Potter  B  (1997)  WH-Indefinites  and  the  structure  of  the  clause  in  Western 

Apache. Doctoral dissertation, UCLA 

Quer  J  (1998)  Mood  at  the  interface.  Doctoral  dissertation,  HIL.Holland  Aca-

demic Graphics, Leiden 

Rackowski A, Travis L (2000) V-Initial languages: X or XP movement and ad-
verbial placement. In Carnie A, Guilfoyle E (eds), The syntax of verb-initial 
languages. Oxford University Press, Oxford 

Reinhart  T  (1981)  Syntactic  domains  for  semantic  rules.  In  Guenthner  and 
Schmidt, editors, Formal semantics and pragmatics for natural languages. Rei-
del. 

Rizzi L (1997)  The fine structure of the left periphery. In Haegeman L (ed) Ele-
ments of grammar: handbook  of generative syntax. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht. . 

Shumway  E  (1988)  Intensive  course  in  Tongan.  The  Institution  for  Polynesian 

Studies, Brigham Young University: Hawaii. 

Stowell T (1981) Origins of phrase structure. Doctoral dissertation, MIT 
Stowell Tim (1993) The phrase structure of tense.  In Rooryck J, Zaring L (eds) 

Phrase structure and the lexicon. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht 

Stowell T (1995)  What do the present and past tenses mean? In Bertinetto PM, 
Bianchi  V,  Higginbotham  J,  Squartini  M  (eds)  Temporal  reference,  aspect, 
and  actionality.  Vol.  1:  semantic  and  syntactic  perspectives.  Rosenberg  and 
Sellier, Torino 

Stubblefield  M,    Stubblefield  C  (1991)  Diccionario  Zapoteca  de  Mitla.  Oaxaca 
serie  de  vocabularios  y  diccionarios  indígenas.  número  31.  Instituto 
Lingüístico del Verano, Mexico City. 

Szabolcsi A, Zwarts F (1993)  Weak islands and an algebraic semantics for scope-

taking. Natural language semantics 1. 

Vergnaud J-R (1974) French relative clauses. Doctoral dissertation, MIT. 
Zagona K (1990)  Times as temporal argument structure. Presented at the Time in 

Language Conference, MIT. 

Zanuttini  R  (1991)  Syntactic  properties  of  sentential  negation.  A  comparative 
study  of  romance  languages.  Doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania. 

Zwart CJW (1993). Dutch syntax: A minimalist approach. Doctoral dissertation, 

Rijksuniversiteit Groningen. 

 


