REMNANT RAISING AND VSO CLAUSAL ARCHITECTURE
Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory VOLUME 66
Managing Editors
Marcel den Dikken, City University of New York Liliane Haegeman, University of Lille
Joan Maling, Brandeis University
Editorial Board
Guglielmo Cinque, University of Venice
Carol Georgopoulos, University of Utah
Jane Grimshaw, Rutgers University
Michael Kenstowicz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Hilda Koopman, University of California, Los Angeles Howard Lasnik, University of Connecticut at Storrs
Alec Marantz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology John J. McCarthy, University of Massachusetts, Amherst Ian Roberts, University of Cambridge
￼￼The titles published in this series are listed at the end of this volume.
REMNANT RAISING AND VSO CLAUSAL ARCHITECTURE
A Case Study of San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
by
FELICIA LEE
University of British Columbia, BC, Canada
￼
A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN-10 1-4020-4300-7 (HB) ISBN-13 978-1-4020-4300-0 (HB) ISBN-10 1-4020-4308-2 (e-book) ISBN-13 978-1-4020-4308-6 (e-book)
Published by Springer,
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
www.springer.com
Printed on acid-free paper
All Rights Reserved
© 2006 Springer
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
Printed in the Netherlands.
￼
Contents
Foreword vii Preface xi
1. An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec 1
2. Background and Theoretical Assumptions 29
3. The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ:
Arguments for VP Raising 49
4. Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement:
Some Common Negation Structures in SLQZ 107
5. More on the Structure of the Left Periphery:
The Syntax of Questions 165
6. The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas
Quiaviní Zapotec 199
References 269
Preface
I am deeply indebted to the following individuals for their intellectual, fi- nancial, and moral support:
Pamela Munro first introduced me to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec dur- ing her own pioneering research on the language, and introduced me to the joys of linguistic fieldwork. She has been a great mentor, role model, and friend. My Los Angeles-based language consultants, Rodrigo Garcia, Paco Lopez, and Felipe Lopez have been the most thoughtful, helpful, and gen- erous consultants one could hope for, and I am deeply indebted to them. I also owe a debt of gratitude to the people of San Lucas Quiaviní for their hospitality, patience, and helpfulness during my visits to their town.
This current work grew out of my UCLA dissertation, and I am grateful to Hilda Koopman and Tim Stowell for helping me through the early stages of my syntactic theorizing. Aaron Broadwell, Andrew Carnie, Henry Davis, Rose-Marie Déchaine, Richard Kayne, Lisa Matthewson, and Martina Wiltschko also provided useful comments and questions dur- ing the development of this work. Lisa was also kind enough to fund some of my fieldwork through a grant of hers, for which I am also grateful.
Further funding for this work comes from a University of British Co- lumbia Hampton grant on first-language acquisition in SLQZ held by my- self and Joseph Stemberger. I am grateful to Joe and our two graduate re- search assistants (Diana Gibraiel and Mario Chavez Peon) for sharing my interest in SLQZ. Their insights on SLQZ, mostly in the realm of phonol- ogy, morphophonemics, and acquisition, have been both stimulating and humbling to me: they remind me of how much more work there still is to be done.
Thanks are also due to Bryan Gick, Chris Golston, Paivi Koskinen, Ki- mary Shahin, and their respective spouses and families: they provided me with friendship, entertainment, and both linguistic and non-linguistic ad- vice, all useful and accurate.
My parents, Fred and Margaret Lee, and sisters (Serena, Pamela, and Sondra) have always stood by me, and will always have my gratitude.
Finally, I owe my thanks to Glenn Price, for everything else I could want in life.
Foreword
The goals of this book are twofold: first, to document some of the basic syntactic structures of SLQZ, a little-examined indigenous language of Mexico; and second, to explore the theoretical implications of SLQZ syn- tactic structure for other VSO languages. A major challenge posed by SLQZ is the large number of syntactic contexts, such as negation and ad- verbial clitic placement, in which verbs and XPs such as prepositional phrases and DPs may appear interchangeably. The existence of such struc- tures raises serious questions about the generally held assumption that verb movement for tense and agreement checking is invariably head-movement.
I argue instead that verbal movement in SLQZ is actually VP-remnant movement, rather than head-movement: this allows verbs and other con- stituents to treated uniformly in the contexts in which they both may ap- pear. I also show that such an analysis can be motivated theoretically by Kayne’s (1994) Antisymmetry constraints. I will show that not only do the highly constrained rules on possible movement and base-generated struc- ture account for the complex morphological and syntactic structures of SLQZ, but potentially other, unrelated, VSO languages as well.
Chapter 2 presents the theoretical background to be assumed in the rest of the work. Here, Kayne’s work on antisymmetry will be introduced, and some of its possible consequences laid out. Chapter 2 will also provide a brief outline of previous research on the derivation of VSO word order across a range of languages. In this section of the chapter, I present evi- dence from SLQZ showing that these previous analyses cannot account for the morphological and word order constraints of SLQZ.
Chapter 3 presents the central thesis of this work: if Kayne’s principles of antisymmetry are to be maintained, it must be assumed that VSO word order in SLQZ is derived by movement of a VP-remnant, rather than a verbal head, to clause-initial position. This proposal is supported by both morphological and syntactic data: first, I show that there is no way to de- rive the ordering of verbal morphemes in SLQZ verbal complexes through head-movement without assuming a base structure radically different from any attested in the literature; second, I show that SLQZ verbs and full
x Foreword
phrasal projections such as DPs and PPs participate interchangeably in a number of syntactic constructions. The fact that SLQZ verbs behave like XPs in syntactic operations supports the morphological evidence against their head status. I also briefly outline evidence that VP-remnant- movement may also account for VSO word order in a number of other, un- related languages.
In Chapter 4, I show how the VP-raising analysis accounts for three common SLQZ negation constructions: clausal negation, constituent nega- tion, and existential negation. I will also show that differences between these negation structures can be used as diagnostics to determine the order- ing of left periphery functional projections, such as focus, and topic projec- tions, in SLQZ. Furthermore, constraints on the interaction of negation structures with other constructions, such as questions and relative clause formation, also reveal additional antisymmetry-driven constraints on movement and structure, which will be described in detail.
Chapter 5 builds upon the analysis of functional projections developed in Chapter 4. It examines the syntax and semantics of question formation in SLQZ, which reveal additional information about the interaction of left periphery projections (such as focus, topic, and mood) in syntactic con- structions and in the expression of different information structures. Much of this information comes from the examination of yes/no questions: SLQZ employs three distinct yes/no question markers, which differ both in their syntactic features and their discourse uses. WH-questions in SLQZ also reveal important information about the syntax of questions, and chal- lenge some commonly held ideas about the correlation between wh- movement and syntactic focus movement: while it has been argued for a range of languages that wh-movement and focus movement target the same projection, SLQZ reveals a number of contexts in which they may co-occur in the same clause. This suggests that wh- and focus target differ- ent projections: the numerous contexts in SLQZ and other languages in which they appear to compete for the same position are due to the semantic requirements of wh-words: they encode focus as well as interrogative fea- tures, which in most cases are checked by movement of the word through focus.
Chapter 6 shows both syntactic and interpretive evidence for the pres- ence of syntactic tense in SLQZ. While the Zapotec languages have been traditionally thought to lack syntactic tense and be purely aspect marking, I show that some of SLQZ’s aspect markers should actually be considered tense markers that also encode aspect. Evidence for this comes from the different possible interpretations of these markers in different syntactic contexts, such as differences in possible interpretation between fronted and
￼
Foreword xi
in situ clausal complements of verbs with certain tense/aspect markers. Furthermore, the behavior of these aspect markers in different syntactic configurations suppports recent proposals that tense is scope-sensitive, and that certain morphological tense markers should be treated as polarity items sensitive to the presence of tense heads, rather than heads of tense projections themselves. This chapter also shows how these proposals are implemented syntactically, and that their syntax is consistent with the VP- raising analysis previously outlined.
￼
1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
1.1 Overview
This chapter presents a brief overview of the geneological, geographical, and ethnological background of SLQZ and its speakers, as well as a brief descriptive survey of the basic features of SLQZ phonology, morphology, and grammar. No theoretical explanation is attempted here; rather, this chapter aims to provide a basic overview of some of the data that will be accounted for in later chapters. This chapter gives special attention to the distribution and interpretation of SLQZ aspect markers. These markers, as will be shown below, also encode information about tense and mood. This chapter will also introduce some of the basic technical terminology and assumptions about SLQZ syntax that I assume in the rest of this work.
Much of this terminology I adopt, as well as large proportion of the basic information described here, was first observed and documented in the San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec dictionary (Munro, Lopez, et al 1999) (hereafter referred to as ML).1 Many of the examples below come directly from this work, and will be cited as such. Unmarked examples given in this and following chapters come from my own fieldnotes or those col- lected in the SLQZ field methods course given at UCLA in fall 1994 and winter 1995.
1.2 SLQZ: The Language and Its Speakers
SLQZ belongs to the Otomanguean stock, which comprises 174 diverse languages spoken over much of Mexico. It belongs to the Zapotecan
1 Munro, Pamela, and Felipe H. Lopez (with Michael R. Gallant, Rodrigo Garcia and Olivia V.Méndez) (1999) Dicyonaary X:tèe’n Dìi’zh Sah Sann Luu’c: San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec Dictionary. Diccionario Zapoteco de San Lucas Quiaviní. Chicano Studies Research Center Pub- lications,, UCLA
￼
2 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
group of languages, which itself is divided into two families: Zapotec and Chatino. The Chatino languages are all spoken in Oaxaca, and the much larger group of Zapotec languages are spoken in Oaxaca and Veracruz State.
Kaufman (1993) further divides the Zapotec languages into three sub- groups: Northern, Central, and Southern Zapotec. Under this classification system, SLQZ falls into the Central Zapotec group, which includes the Zapotec varieties spoken in the Oaxaca Valley south of Oaxaca City.
The exact number of Zapotec languages is under debate; the SIL Ethnologue (Grimes 2005) currently lists 58 Zapotec languages. Mutual intelligibility (or the lack of it) is standardly used to determine if different varieties of Zapotec spoken in a geographically contiguous area are indeed distinct languages, or the same language with minor dialectal differences. Use of this diagnostic is complicated by the fact that intelligibility between the speech varieties of neighboring communities not always mutually symmetric: as the SIL Ethnologue notes, speakers of San Juan Guelavia Zapotec, a Valley Zapotec language, feel there is a 100% intelligibility rate between their language and the Zapotec variety spoken in Tlacolula. However, speakers of Tlacolula Zapotec perceive only a 58% intelligibility rate with SJG Zapotec.
SLQZ is spoken in the town of San Lucas Quiaviní, Oaxaca. It is located about 3 miles outside Tlacolula, a town of about 15,000 people that serves as a regional market center. Like most indigenous towns in Mexico, San Lucas Quiaviní takes its name from two sources: a Spanish saint’s name, and an indigenous place name. (“Quiaviní” is a Hispanicization of Gyi’bnnii, which is thought to be derived from a SLQZ word for a type of precious stone.)
About 2000 people currently live full-time in San Lucas (according to 1990 census figures). Most support themselves as farmers. A significant percentage of working-age men from the town live and work in the United States (mostly in the Los Angeles area) while supporting families in San Lucas; other families from San Lucas have settled permanently in theUS.
Virtually all residents of San Lucas are fluent in SLQZ. The town’s civic affairs are conducted in SLQZ, and children still acquire it as a first language, getting their first exposure to Spanish in elementary school. Residents who have attended school or worked outside San Lucas are bi- lingual in SLQZ and Spanish (and sometimes English), but many older people, particularly women, are monolingual SLQZ speakers. However, because of the small size of the community and increasing social and economic ressures to assimilate into mainstream Mexican (or American) culture, the language is considered endangered.
The data in this work come from several sources. Unmarked SLQZ examples in this work come from notes collected during a field methods course on SLQZ offered at UCLA in the 1994-1995 academic year or my own fieldnotes taken in subsequent years. Other SLQZ examples
￼
1.3 A Brief Overview of SQLZ Phonology 3
have been taken from ML and from recordings made in San Lucas Quiaviní in summer 2004.
1.2.1 Previous Work on the Language
Munro and Lopez’s (1999) dictionary of SLQZ was the first comprehen- sive published record of the language. A number of closely related lan- guages spoken in the region surrounding San Lucas, however, have been closely documented: San Juan Guelavía Zapotec (Jones and Knudsen 1977), Santa Ana del Valle Zapotec (Broadwell 1991), San Pablo Güilá Zapotec (Lopez Cruz 1997), and Mitla Zapotec (Briggs 1961, Stubblefield and Stubblefield 1991). Lopez Cruz, and a number of SLQZ speakers con- sulted by Munro and Lopez, feel that of these languages, San Pablo Güilá Zapotec bears the closest resemblance to SLQZ.
1.3 A Brief Overview of SLQZ Phonology
SLQZ has a complex phonetic and phonological system, which includes phonemic distinctions among four phonation types, as well as distinct tones.
1.3.1 SLQZ Consonants
In this section, I will briefly outline the SLQZ sound system and the tran- scription orthography for SLQZ developed by ML, which will be used throughout this work2.
The inventory of consonants in SLQZ is seen in Table 1:
2 The orthographic system used in this work was originally designed as a practical orthography for SLQZ. However, Munro and Lopez have recently developed a simplified practical orthography for SLQZ, which does not reflect differences in vowel length or phonation type. This system, like the orthographic systems developed for other Zapotec varieties, is designed for use by native speakers who can recover this information from context. (Munro and others still use the older system for transcribing texts and recording new data (P. Munro, p.c.)). I will use this older, more detailed orthography in this work in the interest of providing a detailed record for non-SLQZ speakers.
￼￼
4 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
￼￼sonorant affricate
w
r ts rr
ch
j, y
Like other Zapotec languages, SLQZ has a fortis/lenis, rather than strict voiced/voiceless, contrast in its consonant pairs. In the chart above, the first symbol in each pair of consonants represents a fortis consonant, the second its lenis counterpart.
The exact phonetic definition of fortis and lenis consonants in Zapotec has long been under discussion (Nellis and Hollenbach 1980, Jaeger 1983). In SLQZ, the contrast between fortis and lenis obstruents generally appears as a difference in voicing; lenis obstruents are generally voiced (but de- voiced word-finally), and fortis obstruents are voiceless. However, other acoustic factors distinguish them as well. These differences are clearest in the contrast between fortis and lenis stops: lenis stops, besides being (usu- ally) voiced, are less strongly articulated and tend to be fricated. More subtle differences distinguish fortis and lenis sonorants: fortis sonorants tend to be longer, and vowels preceding them tend to be shorter.
The r/rr pair shown above does not represent a fortis/lenis contrast; thus, they are shown on separate lines. Rather r is a native phoneme, and rr (a trilled r) appears in Spanish loanwords or over morpheme boundaries. ML analyze it as a cluster in these contexts; they point out a similar pro- posal made for Guelavia Zapotec, a language closely related to SLQZ, by Jones and Knudson (1977).
The symbols shown in the chart represent ML’s transcription orthogra- phy. Consistent with Spanish orthographic rules (and thus the spelling con- ventions to which most SLQZ speakers are accustomed), the velar stops c and g are spelled qu and gu, respectively, before front vowels, as in qui’lly, “kilo”, and gui’ihzh, “dry cornstalk”.
stop
labial p,b alveolar t,d
palatal-alveolar retroflex palatal
velar
fricative nasal
f mm,m s,z nn, n
lateral
ll, l
￼c, g
ng, nng
x, zh x:, zh
￼Table 1. SLQZ consonants.
1.3.2 SLQZ Vowels
1.3 A Brief Overview of SQLZ Phonology 5
￼SLQZ has six vowels: three high vowels, two mid vowels, and one low vowel, as seen in Table 2:
iëu eo a
Table 2. SLQZ vowels.
The table above represents the vowels in SLQZ orthography. All of these except ë are pronounced as they would in IPA. The double-dotted “e” (ë) is a high, mid, unrounded vowel; some speakers use it only rarely (replacing it with e in most contexts), and it generally appears less fre- quently than other vowels.
These vowels may be combined to form a number of diphthongs: ai, au, ei, ue, ia,ie, iu, ua, ue, and ëi. ML also note that other diphthongs may also appear in certain Spanish loanwords. SLQZ also has contrastive vowel length; long vowels are written VV.
SLQZ has four phonation types. Besides unmarked (modal) phonation, SLQZ shows phonemic contrast among breathy vowels (written in tran- scription orthography as Vh), creaky vowels (written with a grave accent above the vowel ( ` ) ), and laryngeal (glottalized) vowels (written V’). More than one phonation type may appear within a syllable.
Because of this range of possible contrasts, SLQZ syllables can be quite complex. ML note that the largest possible SLQZ syllable can take the form CCGVVVCG, where C represents consonants, V vowels, and G glides. Although an SLQZ syllable may consist of a single vowel, most are consonant-initial and contain more than one vowel.
SLQZ, like other Zapotec languages, is tonal. While tone is clearly pho- nemically contrastive in most of the Zapotec languages documented thus far (see Black and Pickett (1997), among others), the situation is less clear in SLQZ. ML note a close correlation between phonation type (or combi- nation of phonation type) and tone: so far, no minimal pairs have been found that are identical in form and phonation type, but different only in tone. For this reason, ML suggest that tone may prove fully predictable from the interaction of phonation type, stress, and other factors. This, how- ever, remains an issue for further investigation.
6 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar
1.4.1 Word Order and Sentence Types
SLQZ, like most Zapotec languages, is a VSO language. It also allows SVO and OVS word order when the fronted argument is interpreted with contrastive focus:
1. Y-tàa’az Gye’eihlly Li’eb irr-beat Mike Felipe
“Mike will beat Felipe”
2. Gye’eihlly y-tàa’az Li’eb
Mike irr-beat Felipe
“MIKE will beat Felipe”/ “Felipe will beat MIKE”
These examples provide strong evidence that focus is expressed through syntactic movement in SLQZ. This point will be argued for in detail in Chapters 3 and 4.
SLQZ also lacks overt case marking, as seen on the previous examples. In cases where arguments are fronted, the thematic roles of arguments is potentially ambiguous and must be clarified by context: thus, in (2), the focused argument “Mike” can be interpreted as either a subject or an ob- ject.
Embedded clauses generally appear without complementizers or other markers of subordination. Their word order is identical to that of matrix clauses:
3. Nài ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly cay-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb yesterday neut-say Mike prog-sick Felipe “Yesterday, Mike said Felipe is sick”
Yes/no questions in SLQZ are formed by the addition of one of three question markers. Two of these (laàa’ and uu) appear sentence-initially, and the third (èee) appears sentence-finally. Other than the addition of the question marker, word order within yes/no questions remains the same as that of non-interrogative sentences:
4. Cay-ùall Jwaany li’ebr prog-read Juan book
“Juan is reading a book”
5. Laàa’ cay-ùall Jwaany li’ebr?
Q prog-read Juan book “Is Juan is reading a book?”
￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 7
6. Uu cay-ùall Jwaany li’ebr? Q prog-read Juan boo
“Is Juan is reading a book?”
7. Cay-ùa’ll Jwaany li’ebr eèe? prog-read Juan book Q
“Is Juan is reading a book?”
There are subtle differences in usage and meaning denoted by the choice of question marker; these are discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
Wh-words are fronted in SLQZ; wh-in-situ is disallowed:
8. Xi b-ìi’lly-ëng? what perf-read-3s.prox “What did he read?”
9. *B-ìi’lly-ëng xi? perf-read-3s.prox what “What did he read?”
Multiple wh-questions are rare in SLQZ; some speakers do not use them at all, and those who do find them marginal:
10. ?Tu xi b-inylohoh? who what perf-look at
“Who saw what?”
1.4.2 Other Basic Constructions
SLQZ shows the canonical features of most VSO languages: it has prepo- sitions rather than postpositions, adjectives generally follow nouns, relative clauses are head-initial, and possessive constructions are possessor fi nal.
Like other Zapotec languages (and large number of other indigenous Mexican languages), SLQZ uses body part words as prepositions: for in- stance, dehts, “back”, is used as a preposition meaning “in back of, behind”; laa’iny, “stomach”, is used as a preposition meaning “inside”; lo- hoh, “face”, is used as a preposition meaning “at” or “on”. Some examples of these appear below:
11. N-ago’-o’ dehts yu’uh neut-lie-2s.inf. back house
“You’re lying in back of the house”
12. N-u’uh bihih laa’iny yu’uh neut-exist air stomach house “There is air in the house”
￼
8 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
In the remainder of this work, I will gloss these words with their prepo- sitional meanings when they are used as such. (Lillehaugen (2003) shows that children acquire body part terms and homophonous location terms as separate lexical items, and treat them as syntactically distinct.)
SLQZ attributive adjectives generally follow nouns:
13. B-cwààa’ah bùunny pelo’t xnìaa ròo’oh perf-throw person ball red big “The man threw the big red ball”
Quantifiers and determiners generally precede they nouns they modify:
14. chòonn zhyàa’p three girl
“three girls” (from Munro, course notes, 1997)
15. Yra’ta bùunny lohnyààa’ r-unydaàa’n zêêi’ny every person field hab-do-much work “Every farmer works hard”
16. ra ca’rt plural letter
“letters”
Munro observes that quantifiers, like many adjectives, can behave syntactically like verbs when used as predicates: pronominal subject agreement markers may attach to them (just as they do to verbs) (17),and they may appear with aspect markers (which obligatorily mark verbs) (18-19):
17. Tyo’p-rëng two 3p.prox
“(There are) two of them”
18. y-ro’p-rëng irr-two-3p.prox
“The two of them”
19. s-tyo’p def-two
“Two more” (examples from Munro, class notes, 1997)
Aspect markers on quantifiers, however, do not have the same semantic usage that they do when attached to verbs: while the Irrealis and Definite aspect markers are usually used to express future events when
￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 9
attached to verbs, they indicate collective readings and “more” readings, respectively, when attached to quantifiers.
Other verb-like traits of quantifiers noted by Munro are their tendency to appear sentence-initially when used as predicates, and their ability to take certain clitics that normally appear on verbs, such as -zhya’/-zhyi’, which indicates epistemic possibility:
20. Chòonn-zhyi’ bùunny m-nnàa lòo’-ng three-must person perf-see face-3s.prox “Three men must have seen him”
(from Munro, course notes, 1997)
Nouns without determiners or quantifiers can be interpreted as either definite or indefinite entities, and either singular or plural. Thus, mni’ny, “child”, can mean, depending on context “a child”, “the child”, “(some) children”, or “the children”. Use of the plural marker ra is purely optional.
Relative clauses are head-initial. The relative marker nih appears obliga- torily in non-interrogative restrictive relative clauses:
21. Studya’aann nih b-inylohoh Pa’amm n-u’uh rèe’ student rel perf-see-at Pam neut-exist here “The student that saw Pam/ that Pam saw is here”
Headless relatives also appear in SLQZ. They may be used as either free relatives, or, as in the example below, as coreferential with another argu- ment in the sentence in which they appear:
22. Campesyenn n-àa [nih b-zhyàag-a’ nài’] farmer neut-be rel perf-meet-1s yesterday “The person I met yesterday is a farmer”
monly
Possessive constructions are possessor-final. They are most com formed with a possessed nominal preceded by the possessive marker and followed by the possessor:
23. x:-ca’rr Gye’eihlly poss-car Mike
“Mike’s car”
and Adjectives modifying the possessum appear between the possessum
the possessor:
24. x:-sabaad xniaa wgyee’ihzh-a’ poss-shoe red expensive-1s “my expensive red shoe(s)”
￼x:-
10 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
An alternate possessive construction, which apparently does not differ in usage or meaning from the one shown above, is formed with the “dummy” possessed nominal x:tèe’ or x:tèe’n :
25. x:-studya’aann-a’ poss-student-1s
“my student”
26. studya’aann x:-tee’n-a’
student poss-nom-1s “My student”
SLQZ has a number of nouns that obligatorily appear with possessors. This group of nouns includes some body parts and certain other inalienably possessed elements. A number of these form possessive constructions without the possessive marker x:- :
27. liahz-a’ home-1s
“my home”
28. ru’-a’ mouth-1s
“my mouth”
Not all nouns that can be considered inherently possessed semantically, however, necessarily appear in possessed form; the SLQZ words da’ad, “father”, and nnaàan, “mother”, for instance, may appear without posses- sors.
A small number of nouns (which are not inherently possessed) have ir- regular forms in possessive constructions:
29. bèe’cw “dog”
30. x:-yèe’cw Gye’eihlly poss-dog Mike
“Mike’s dog”
1.4.3 SLQZ Verbal Morphology
SLQZ verbs can take complex forms. Besides carrying standard inflec- tional features (tense and agreement), they may also carry additional mor- phological material encoding direction, causation, manner, and modality, among other things. In this section, I will provide an overview of these features. I will begin this discussion with a detailed description of
￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 11
the use and interpretation of SLQZ aspect markers, since this information will be crucial later in this work.
The SLQZ Aspect Markers and Their Uses
SLQZ expresses tense and aspect by prefixing one of seven aspectual markers to the verb stem. Although I will follow longstanding tradition in Zapotec linguistics and refer to these prefixes as “aspect” markers,3 these markers can also express tense and mood as well. SLQZ verbs obligatorily appear with aspect markers; bare verb stems are not used. Six of the seven aspect markers are shown in boldface on the verb stem -tàa’az, “to beat”, in Table 3:
￼￼aspect
Habitual Progressive Perfective Irrealis Subjunctive Definite
-tàa’az “beat”
rtàa’az catàa’az btàa’az ytàa’az ntàa’az stàa’az
gloss
“beats (regularly)” “is beating” “beat”(past)
“will beat”
“was going to beat” “will definitely beat”
￼￼Table 3. SLQZ aspect markers.
The seventh aspect (the Neutral aspect, realized as the prefix n-) appears
on a small number of mostly stative or locational verbs:
31. N-àa-ng banguual neut-be-3s.prox old
“He/she is old”
32. X:-nnàan-a’ n-u’uh Sann Luu’c poss-mother-1s neut-exist San Lucas “My mother is in San Lucas”
Most of these aspect markers have more than one allomorph: the Per- fective marker appears as b- ,w-, or gu-; the Irrealis appears as either y , chi-, g-, or l-; the Subjunctive as n- or ny-; and the Definite appears
3 This tradition is exemplified in Butler (1988), among others. A notable exception to this convention is Black (1994), who labels the verbal prefixes that encode only tense and aspect as “aspects”, and those that also encode modal informa- tion as “moods”. This distinction will be exploited later in this chapter, and will be described in more theoretical terms in Chapter 5.
￼
12 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
as either s- or z-. The Definite and Subjunctive allomorphs are phonologically conditioned (the Definite marker surfaces as s- before voiceless-consonant-initial stems and appears as z- elsewhere; the Sub- junctive form n- appears before consonant-initial verb stems and appears as ny- elsewhere). The allomorphs for Perfective and Irrealis aspect are lexically selected by verbs.
In his comparative reconstruction of proto-Zapotec, Kaufman (1994) divides verb stems into four classes corresponding to the set of aspectual allomorphs they select: transitive verbs beginning with /u/ or /e/ take the perfective allomorph /b/ while consonant-initial transitive verbs take /g/; transitive or intransitive verbs beginning with sounds other than /p/ and /k/ and verbs with transitive/intransitive (causative/versive) alternations take the same set of allomorphs. A similar classification system was proposed for Guevea de Humboldt Zapotec by Marks (undated ms.). Her classifica- tion system differs crucially from Kaufman’s in that she assumes no se- mantic motivation for the different classes; aspectual allomorphs are either lexically selected or phonologically determined. I will not pursue this issue further.
Linguists working on Zapotec have traditionally referred to the temporal prefixes as “aspect” markers because they overtly convey the internal structure of events rather than the temporal relation to the speaker. A simple clause with a verb marked with progressive aspect, for instance, could be used to express a present, past, or future act in progress:
33. Ca-beèz-a’ lìu’ prog-wait-1s you
“I am/was/will be waiting for you”
Many of these markers, however, also encode tense and modal informa- tion. This has been shown to be the case in other Zapotec languages as well.
In her 1994 dissertation on Quiegolani Zapotec, Cheryl Black divides the aspect markers of that language into two groups: those that denote purely temporal relations (aspect and tense), which she labels “aspects”; and those that denote modality (the relation of events to sets of possible worlds), which she labels “moods”. This distinction holds in SLQZ (although, as I show below, the aspect markers that denote modality can also behave non-modally and simply encode tense and aspect information). The division of SLQZ aspects into what I will call modal and non-modal groups is seen in Table 4:
￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 13
￼￼Non-Modal Aspects
Modal Aspects Subjunctive Irrealis Definite
￼Habitual Perfective Progressive Neutral
r-
b-, gu-, m-, w-
ca-, cay- n-, Ø
ny-
y-, g-, ch-, l-
z-, s-
￼Table 4. Modal and non-modal aspect markers in SLQZ. Uses of Non-Modal Aspects
The functions of the four non-modal aspects are fairly straightforward.
The habitual marker r, as its name implies, is used to denote ongoing or
regularly repeated states or events:
34. R-àa’p-a’ teihby li’ebr hab-have-1s one book
“I have one book”
The progressive marker expresses immediately ongoing events or states, as seen in (33).
The Perfective marker is used to denote completed actions (either com- pleted in the past or in the future):
35. B-guhty-a’ bzihny perf-kill-1s mouse “I killed a mouse”
36. Yzh:ii chih y-zëhnny-a’ al b-da’uh Gye’eihlly tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike “When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten”
The Perfective marker is also used to form affirmative singular impera- tives. In this imperative structure, no subject agreement marker appears. This in the one case in which the Perfective aspect serves a modal, rather than purely aspectual, function:
37. B-da’uh! perf-eat
Eat!
The Neutral marker n (or its null allomorph) appears on only a small number of verbs, which are, for the most part, stative or locational.
14 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
Among these are ru’uh,4 “exist”, and nàa, “be”, verbs denoting temporary states (ra’tga’ah, “lies down”), and verbs denoting knowledge (naann, “know”):
38. Me’s n-àa Jwaany teacher neut-be Juan “Juan is a teacher”
Uses of Modal Aspects
The modal aspects show a wider and more complex range of possible in- terpretations than the non-modal ones. These interpretations include non- modal as well as modal readings. In this section, I will provide a brief de- scriptive overview of the possible interpretations of each of the modal as- pects. A direct correlation between the modal and non-modal readings of these aspects will be proposed and argued for in Chapter 6.
In this chapter, I assume informal definitions of “modal” and “non- modal”. “Non-modal”, for the purposes of this discussion, are those in which the event described is taken to occur in the actual world of the speaker and listener.
An example of a non-modal reading can be seen in (39):
39. Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr irr-sell Mike car
“Mike will sell the car”
In (39) the verb “sell” refers to an event assumed to take place at a later time in the actual world containing Mike and the speaker. The proposition of Mike selling the car at a later time is presumed to be a real event in the real world: the speaker would not have uttered this sentence if she or he did not believe it would be true that Mike would sell his car. This is thus a case in which one of SLQZ’s modal aspects (the Irrealis) receives a non- modal interpretation.
I will define “modal” readings here as those expressing the relationship between an event and the actual world of the speaker and listener. An ex- ample of a modal reading of the Irrealis aspect is its interpretation as a complement of “want” in (40):
40. R-càa’z y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr hab-want irr-sell Mike car
“Mike wants to sell the car”
4 Following the convention set forth in the SLQZ dictionary, I cite verbs in isolation with the habitual marker r-, except in cases such as nàa, “be”, where no habitual form exists.
￼￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 15
In (40), the event of Mike selling the car does not take place the actual world in which Mike exists (since it’s a potential, rather than actual, event) but rather in the set of possible worlds denoted by Mike’s desire. In contrast to (39) above, in which the event of Mike selling the car at some future time is presumed to be true, in this case, the event is expressed as possible, but the speaker and listener are not committed to believing it will (or won’t ) actually take place.
These admittedly sketchy definitions will be refined and elaborated upon in Chapter 5. Now I return to the description of the distribution and interpretation of the three modal aspects.
The examples above showed two of the most common uses of the Irrealisaspect. Inmatrixclauses,itisusedtoexpressfutureevents,asseen in(39) above and (41) below:
41. Y-da’uhw-ënn gueht irr-eat-1p tortilla
“We will eat tortillas”
It is also used in complement clauses of intensional verbs and in em- bedded imperatives:
42. R-càa’z-a’ y-guhty-a’ bzihny hab-want-1s irr-kill-1s mouse “I want to kill the mouse”
43. R-e’ihpy-a’ Gye’eihlly y-tòo’oh ca’rr hab-tell-1s Mike irr-sell car
“I told Mike to sell the car”
It also appears in the complements of certain modals:
44. N-àa pahr y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr neut-be for irr-sell Mike car
“Mike has to sell the car”
45. Z-àa’lle’eh g-uuny bùunny nadaar rèe’ def-allow irr-do person swim here “Swimming is allowed here”
It is worth noting that the contexts in which Irrealis verbs receive modal readings in SLQZ are closely parallel to those in which subjunctive mark- ing is assigned to verbs in Romance (and other) languages.
￼
16 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
The Definite aspect is most commonly used instead of the Irrealis aspect to express strong speaker presupposition about the occurrence of a future event. By using the Definite aspect, the speaker expresses a belief that an event will “definitely” happen; thus, the name given to this aspect:
46. Z-u’uh cla’s Myee’rcw def-exist class Wednesday
“There will (definitely) be class Wednesday
This is the usual usage of Definite verbs in matrix clauses.
Besides their stronger implication of speaker presupposition, Definite verbs also differ from Irrealis verbs in their syntactic distribution. Most notably, while verbs with other aspects freely allow preverbal subjects or objects with contrastive focus readings (as seen in (1) and (2)), verbs with
Definite aspect generally disallow preverbal arguments:
47. S-tàa’az Gye’eihlly Li’eb def-beat Mike Felipe
“Mike will definitely beat Felipe”
48. *Gye’eihlly s-tàa’az Li’eb
Mike def-beat Felipe “Mike will definitely beat Felipe”
A syntactic and semantic account for this asymmetry will be presented in Chapters 4 and 5.
The presence of two distinct aspect markers, distinguished by syntactic
behavior, to express future events is also attested in Quiegolani Zapotec
(hereafter, QZ) (Black 2004). In QZ, the two aspects that can be used to
describe future events (which Black labels “Future” and “Potential”) are
virtually interchangeable semantically; Black reports that either can be
used in future contexts with no change in meaning. There are, however,
distributional constraints that distinguish the QZ Potential and Future
aspects. While verbs with Future aspect (which appears cognate with
SLQZ Definite aspect) may appear in QZ yes/no questions, verbs marked
with Potential aspect (which appears cognate with SLQZ Irrealis aspect) may not:
49. Pe s-oo de nis
Q fut-drink 2s water
“Will you drink water?”
50 *Pe g-oo de nis
Q pot-drink 2s water
“Will you drink water?” (Quiegolani Zapotec: Black 2004)
￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 17
A similar constraint distinguishes SLQZ Definite and Irrealis aspects. In contrast to QZ, which has a single construction for yes/no questions, SLQZ has three distinct yes/no question particles:
51. Nu’uh tu b-da’uh nài’ èee? exist who perf-eat yesterday Q “Did anyone eat yesterday?”
52. Làa’ nu’uh tu b-da’uh nài’?
Q exist who perf-eat yesterday “Did anyone eat yesterday?”
53. Uu nu’uh tu b-da’uh nài’?
Q exist who perf-eat yesterday “Did anyone eat yesterday?”
A detailed account of these markers will be presented in Chapter 5. (SLQZ also has a number of particles that form tag questions, which I do not include here).
The last of the question particles cited above, uu, differs most clearly from the others in distribution and meaning. While èee and làa’ are used when the speaker asking the question is genuinely unsure of the answer, use of uu implies that the speaker is already presupposing a positive an- swer, and is simply asking for this presupposition to be confirmed. Also, while verbs with both Irrealis and Definite aspect may appear in questions with èee and làa’, Irrealis verbs may not appear in uu questions:
54. Uu z-a’uw-u’ beèe’l? Q def-eat-2s.inf. meat “Will you eat meat?”
55. *Uu g-a’uw-u’ beèe’l? Q irr-eat-2s.inf. meat
“Will you eat meat?”
Thus, the Definite and Irrealis aspects differ in not only interpretation, but syntactic distribution.
Verbs with Definite marking can also appear as complements of certain verbs. In some cases, these complement verbs may appear with either Definite or Irrealis aspect. The choice of aspect in these cases lends slightly different interpretations to the sentence:
56. R-ralloh Li’eb s-tòo’oh/*y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr hab believe Felipe def-sell/*irr-sell Mike car
“Felipe thinks Mike will sell the car”
￼
18 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
57. B-inydiahg Li’eb s-tòo’oh/y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr perf-hear Felipe def-sell/irr-sell Mike car
“Felipe heard that Mike will sell the car”
In (56), use of the Definite aspect in the complement clause means Felipe is sure that Mike will sell the car; use of the Irrealis in (57), on the other hand, means Felipe heard that Mike will sell the car but is not necesssarily committed to believing the truth of this proposition.
It is interesting to note that the verbs that select Definite versus Irrealis complements to express future events correspond closely to those that se- lect indicative versus subjunctive complements in other languages, such as the Romance languages.
In a small number of verbs (mostly verbs of motion), Definite allo- morphs may be used instead of Perfective to express past actions or events:5
58. Cë’ity r-ielldyalàa’z-dy-a’ gw-èe-ng Me’ijy
neg hab-believe-neg-1s perf-go-3s.prox Mexico “I don’t believe he went to Mexico”
59. Cë’ity r-ielldyalàa’z-dy-a’ z-èe-ng Me’ijy
neg hab-believe-neg-1s def-go-3s.prox Mexico “I don’t believe he went to Mexico”
There is a slight difference in presupposition implied by the choice of Perfective or Definite aspect in these contexts: (58) would be used if the person under discussion were already back from some trip and the speaker didn’t believe he ever went to Mexico. (59), in contrast, would be used if the person under discussion were still gone, and the speaker didn’t believe he’s currently in Mexico.6
The Subjunctive aspect is not frequently used in matrix clauses, but when it does appear, it expresses incompleted past actions:
60. N-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly c’arr subj-sell Mike car
“Mike was going to sell the car (but didn’t)”
It is often used instead of the Perfective in negative statements or ques- tions with past readings. Although Perfective verbs may appear with clausal negation and in negative questions, my consultant consistently volunteers Subjunctive forms first in these contexts:
5 Black (2004) proposes that this z- prefix, which appears on a small number of motion verbs in a number of Zapotec languages, is not a Definite allomorph at all but a distinct marker denoting actions in progress.
￼￼
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 19
61. Cë’ity n-tòo’oh-dya’ Gye’eihlly ca’rr neg subj-sell-neg Mike car
“Mike didn’t sell the car”
There seems to be no clear semantic difference between the negated variants with Subjunctive versus Perfective aspect.
The Subjunctive aspect also appears as the complement of modals and intensional verbs with Perfective aspect to obtain past-tense readings:
62. G-uhclaaz-a’ n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb perf-want-1s subj-beat-1s Felipe “I wanted to beat Felipe”
63. N-àa pahr n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb neut-be for subj-hit-1s Felipe “I should have hit Felipe”
64. Cë’ity n-àa-dya’ pahr n-tàa’z-a’ Li’eb neg neut-be-neg for subj-hit-1s Felipe “I shouldn’t have hit Felipe”
The Subjunctive, then, appears to serve as the past-tense form of the Ir- realis in complement clauses. This shows clearly the existence of tense- shifting in SLQZ, and thus the necessity of recognizing tense as well as as- pect as part of SLQZ’s syntactic system.
The modal aspects can thus be summarized as follows: the Subjunctive aspect marker seems to express actions that are incomplete in relation to a past reference time, the Irrealis aspect marker expresses actions that are in- complete in relation to a present reference time, and the Definite marker expresses highly possible events in the future.
To sum up, the modal and non-modal aspects in general can be distin- guished in the following ways: The non-modal aspects denote events ex- tensionally anchored to the actual world, while modal aspects may refer to hypothetical or potential, rather than actual, events. The non-modal aspects generally keep the same interpretation in all syntactic environments, while the modal aspects can vary in meaning in different environments. In the following chapters, I will develop and show evidence for a structural account for these contrasts.
1.4.4 Pronouns and Pronominal Clitics
Pronominal subjects appear as clitics that follow the verb stem.
SLQZ has no subject agreement morphology for non-pronominal (that is, lexical, clausal, wh-word, or quantificational) subjects. This is one of the reasons the forms listed below are considered pronominal arguments
themselves, rather than agreement markers.
￼
20
1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
ML list 18 possible clitics for pronominal subjects in SLQZ:
￼￼Person/Number 1s
1p
3s
Clitic
bìi’llya’
bìi’llyënn
bìi’llyëng
bìi’llyrëng
bìi’llyih
bìi’llyrih
bìi’llyëmm
bìi’llyrëmm bìi’llyu’
bìi’llyahd bìi’llyahzh: bìi’llyrahzh: bìi’llyyëbu’ bìi’llyyëbud bìi’llyëb bìi’llyrëb bìi’llyiny bìi’llyriny
Gloss “I read”
“we read”
“he/she/it (nearby) read”
“they (nearby) read”
“he/she (out of sight) read”
“they (out of sight) read”
“he/she/it(animal/child) read”
“they (animals/children) read” “you (informal)read”
“you (plural, informal) read” “he/she (respectful) read” “they (respectful) read” “you (formal) read”
“you (plural, formal) read” “he/she (formal) read” “they (formal) read”
“he (God) read”
“they (gods/saints) read”
￼3p
3s
3p
3s
3p 2s
2p 3s 3p 2s 2p 3s 3p 3s 3p
proximate proximate
distal distal animal
animal informal
informal respectful respectful
formal formal formal formal
reverential reverential
￼Table 5. Pronominal subject clitics (on Perfective form of “read”).
ML observe (as shown above) that SLQZ third-person pronouns four distinct levels of reference to living beings, depending on age and social status. Two other forms of reference, the distal and proximate, are determined by the proximity of the referent to the speaker: pronomi- nal subjects the speaker can see at the time of utterance are expressed with the proximate forms; those that are out of the speaker’s sight are expressed with the distal forms. These forms can be used to refer to both people and inanimate objects. The usage of the remaining forms is determined by the social standing of the speaker and the referent in the
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 21
community. (First-person subject agreement markers are not explicitly marked for proximity or social level; second-person pronouns show a two- way distinction: formal and informal.) The third-person animal form is used to refer to animals and children; the respectful form is used to refer to people who have reached adulthood or who have proven themselves ca- pable of doing the work of an adult: even adults can be referred to with the animal forms if they are thought not to have met the normal requirements of adulthood (Pam Munro (class lectures) reports Felipe Lopez’s observa- tion that even an older woman who has never married can be referred to with the animal form,) The formal form is used to refer older people or those with higher social standing, and the reverential form is used in refer- ence to God, saints, particularly salient natural entities (such as the sun, moon, and water), and physical entities with special cultural salience (such as tortillas).
The singular reverential form is also used as a grammatical subject in a number of subjectless, idiomatic constructions (P. Munro, p.c.):
65. B-làiny primeer gw’eell b-dèèi’dyiag-a’ perf-be.fortunate-3s rev. first time perf-cross-1s “It was fortunate that I crossed the first time”
(from ML)
In these constructions, no other lexical or pronominal subject is possi ble.
SLQZ lacks object agreement as well as subject agreement. Pronominal objects are expressed in one of two ways: with a separate series of morphologically independent pronouns or with one of the clitic forms described above.
Pronominal object clitics follow subject clitics at the right edge of the verb stem (66). If the subject is lexical, the object clitic cliticizes to the subject (67):
66. B- dêêi’dy-a’-ng Li’eb perf-give-1s.-3s.prox Felipe “I gave it to Felipe”
67. B-tòo’ Crisy-ëng perf-sell Cris-3s.prox
“Cris sold it”
The morphologically independent pronouns are shown in Table 6. Note that the independent pronoun forms (with the exception of the first-person forms) can be analyzed as combinations of a base form laa (which has been analyzed as a focus particle) and a bound subject clitic:7
7 See Lee 1995 for evidence that fronted independent pronouns are multimor- phemic, and that constructions with fronted independent pronouns are clefts.
￼￼
22 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
Independent Pronoun nàa’
dannoohnn la’anng làa’rëng la’ai làa’rih làa’mm làa’rëmm liu’
làa’d làa’zh: làa’razh: làa’yuu làa’yuad làa’b làa’rëb làa’iny làa’riny
￼￼Person/Number 1s
1p
3s
￼3p 3s 3p 3s 3p 2s 2p 3s 3p 2s 2p 3s 3p 3s 3p
proximate proximate
distal distal animal
animal informal informal
respectful respectful
formal formal formal formal
reverent. reverent.
￼Table 6. Independent pronouns in SLQZ.
Independent pronouns may be used as both direct and indirect objects:
68. Y-dêêi’dy-a’ buhdy la’anng irr-give-1s chicken 3s.prox “I will give him a chicken”
69. R-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly la’anng. Hab-like Mike 3s.prox
“Mike likes him/her”
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 23
These independent pronoun forms may also be used as emphatic subjects with focused readings. In this capacity, they (1) must co-occur with a corresponding bound subject clitic with the same person/number and formality features, and (2) may only appear in preverbal, not postverbal, position:
70. La’anng ca-nzàa-ng Meijy
3s.prox. prog-visit-3s.prox Mexico
“HE is visiting Mexico” (ML vol 1, p. 23)
71. *Ca-nzàa-ng la’anng Meijy
A second, less frequently used series of independent pronouns, called “nominal pronouns” by ML, also exists: These are used only as subjects, occur only in third person, and like the ordinary independent subject pro- nouns, may appear only preverbally. They differ from other independent pronouns in that they appear without any corresponding subject clitic on the verb stem. Compare the following example to (70):
72. A’anng ca-nzàa Meijy 3s.prox.nom prog-visit Mexico “He is visiting Mexico”
Nominal pronouns consist of a base àa’ followed by one of the twelve third-person clitic forms, as seen in Table 7.
The precise semantic contexts in which these forms are used is still unclear. ML note that they tend to appear in single-clause sentences containing locational or movement verbs, and in some cases seem to have some demonstrative force. One of my speakers sometimes feels they fit best in contexts describing a known subject: thus, they have a topic-like function. This remains an issue for future investigation.
A number of other elements may also be affixed to the verb stem. These may appear affixed to either the left or right edge of the verbal stem.
1.4.5 Preverbal Affixes
Many SLQZ verbs have causative alternates. These forms, which I will call “morphological causatives”, are formed by either the addition of a causa- tive morpheme or a suppletive alternation at the left edge of the verb stem, following the subject agreement marker:
￼
24 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
￼￼Person/Number 3s. proximate
3p. proximate
3s. distal
3p. distal
3s. animal
3p. animal
3s. respectful 3p. respectful 3s. formal
3p. formal
3s. reverential 3p. reverential
Table 7. SLQZ nominal pronouns.
73. r-ihnnih hab-gets light
Nominal Pronoun a’anng
arëng
a’ai
arih a’mm arëmm a’àzh: arahzh àab arëb àiny ariny
￼￼“gets light” (of the sky, before dawn)
74. r-z-ihnnih hab-caus-gets.light
“turns on (a light)”
75. r-yiuh
hab-gets ground
“gets ground up”
76. r-z-iuh
hab-caus-gets ground
“grinds up, pulverizes”
(SLQZ also has a periphrastic causative construction formed with the verb ruhny, “make” with a sentential complement.)
The actual forms of the morphological causative marker are fairly var- ied. The most common forms are z-, gu-, gw-, and fortition of root-initial lenis consonants. Examples of these are shown below:
1.4 A Brief Summary of SLQZ Word Order and Grammar 25
Causative with z-: 77. rèe’cy
“burns” (intr.)
78. rzèe’cy “burns” (trans.)
Causative with gw-:
79. rìe’d
“gets braided” (of hair)
80. rgwèe’d “braids (hair)”
Causative with fortition of lenis consonant:
81. rgàa’ah
“gets caught”
82. rcàa’ah “takes, gets”
Another set of elements that may precede verb stems in SLQZ are direc- tional markers. These markers, reduced forms of the verbs “come” and “go”, give the meanings “comes to V” and “goes to V”, respectively :
83. rgye’eht “plays”
84. ri’cye’eht “goes to play”
85. ra’uh “eats”
86. ri’dta’u “comes to eat”
87. ri’ta’u “goes to eat”
￼￼￼￼￼
26 1 An Introduction to San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
Directional markers precede morphological causative stems:
88. Z-ied- sya’a’ Li’eb Gye’eihlly def-come-make.dance Felipe Mike “Felipe came to make Mike dance”
1.4.6 Postverbal Affixes
A larger, more varied set of elements may follow the verb stem in SLQZ. Some of the more common ones are shown below. Munro 1997 notes that postverbal affixes fall into two basic groups: those that appear directly ad- jacent to the verb stem and behave like part of the verb stem , which she calls “secondary roots”, and postverbal clitics, which appear to form a phonological unit with the verb stem, but not be closely attached syntacti- cally. Secondary roots also differ from clitics in their syntactic distribution: they may only affix to verbs, while there are a large number of clitics that may cliticize to both verbs and other constituents, such as prepositional phrases and nominals. The postverbal clitics themselves fall into a number of different groups depending on their usage and distribution; their gram- mar is quite complex, and I will not attempt a full description of these ele- ments. Rather, I will give a few examples of their more typical usage.
The applicative morpheme nèe is the most common of the secondary roots. It may appear directly after the verb root and before the subject agreement marker. Nèe increases the valance of the verb and allows the in- troduction of an indirect object:
89. B-da’uh-a’ rro’s perf-eat-1s rice
“I ate rice”
90. B-da’uh-nì -a’ Gye’eihlly rro’s perf-eat-app-1s Mike rice
“I ate rice with Mike”
(where /e/ becomes [i] before a low vowel)
Another postverbal particle that behaves similarly is daààn, an intensi- fier that is usually glossed as “ a lot”. Like -nèe , it appears directly adja- cent to the verb stem:
91. R-a’uw-daàa’n Gye’eihlly bx:àady hab-eat-a.lot Mike grasshopper “Mike eats a lot of grasshoppers.”
It may not co-occur with -nèe in a verbal complex:
92. *B-da’uw-daàa’n-nèe Gye’eihlly Li’eb bx:àady perf-eat-a.lot-appl Mike Felipe grasshopper “Mike ate a lot of grasshoppers with Felipe”
￼
1.4ABriefSummaryofSLQZWordOrderandGrammar 27
93. *B-da’uw-nèe-daàa’n Gye’eihlly Li’eb bx:àady
On the assumption that productive word formation processes occur at the syntactic level, this suggests the possibility that daàa’n and nèe oc- cupy the same syntactic position. This possibility will be discussed in the next chapter.
Other morphemes (generally aspectual adverbs and expressions of probability) may appear after the verb root (and after secondary roots, if present) but before the subject agreement marker. SLQZ has a large in- ventory of such morphemes (in contrast to other Zapotec languages, such as Quiegolani Zapotec (Black 2004), which has only two such possible morphemes). A few examples of postverbal markers in SLQZ appear be- low. These do not represent an exhaustive listing of possible postverbal suffixes:
94. N-u’u-g-zhya-rëng Los Angl neut-exist-still-might-3p.prox Los Angeles “They might still be in Los Angeles”
95. Ca-ya’uh-ru-zhya-rëng gueht prog-eat-more-might-3p.prox tortillas “They might be eating more tortillas”
-Zhya’ expresses epistemic probability; I have thus glossed it “might” in the examples above. As the preceding examples show, more than one adverbial expression may attach to a verb. They always appear, however, in fixed order in relation to each other:-zhya’ , for instance, always follows adverbial morphemes such as -ag, “still”, and -ru’, “more”.
In summary, then, the template for possible ordering of morphemes on SLQZ verb roots is as follows:
ASP (dir.)(causative) ROOT (sec. root)(adv.)(adv.)(SAM)(Obj.clitic)
In Chapter 3, I show that this ordering of verbal morphemes poses problems for generally accepted theories on verb movement and how mor- pheme order reflects underlying syntactic structure.
￼
2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
2.1 Overview
This chapter addresses the historical and theoretical proposals assumed in this work. Because the central focus of this book is an alternative deriva- tion of VSO word order and its consequences for the syntax of SLQZ and other VSO languages, this chapter summarizes some of the previous pro- posals about the derivation of VSO languages, and shows (1) the features of VSO languages (including SLQZ) that they attempt to address and (2) how these proposals all fail to account for the word order and morphologi- cal ordering facts of SLQZ. Then, I briefly summarize Kayne,s (1994) Antisymmetry program, which forms the theoretical basis for this work. I assume Kayne,s definitions for most of the technical terms (such as “c-command” and “adjunction”) used in the rest of this work.
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived? Some Previous Accounts1
The question of how VSO word order is derived has long been debated by linguists. This section briefly summarizes some of the earlier proposals for deriving VSO word order, and considers their possible applications to SLQZ. I then show that there is strong theoretical and empirical evidence that an alternative derivation for VSO word order is needed to account for the word order constraints and morphological ordering constraints of SLQZ.
1 Much of the following section is based on the extremely comprehensive review of VSO literature in Carnie 1995.
￼
30 2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
2.2.1 VSO as a Distinct Derivation: Flat Structures
The earliest accounts of VSO syntactic structure in a generative framework assumed an underlying structure distinct from that of SVO and various other language types. These accounts (Awberry 1976, Chung 1976, among others) assumed that VSO languages had verbs, but not VPs. The structures were assumed to be flat:
1.
S
V NP NP
Justification for this structure came from the assumption that since verbs and objects are not contiguous in VSO languages, they cannot form a dis- tinct syntactic constituent. Under the assumption that VSO languages are derived from structures such as (1), verbs and objects in VSO lan- guages should not be able to appear together as syntactic units, andshould not be able to undergo movement or other syntactic processes as a unit.
This prediction, however, is not borne out. It has been widely noted that some VSO languages (such as the Celtic languages) allow verbs and their objects to be clefted2 (the following examples are cited in Carnie (1995), p. 40):
2. Gweld y ci y mae’r dyn
see the dog wh be-the man
“It’s seeing the dog that the man is” (Welsh, from Sproat 1985)
3. Lenn eul levr brezhoneg a ran bembez to-read a book breton wh do-I every day “Read a Breton book is what I do every day (Breton, from Anderson and Chung 1977)
This suggests that, at least in the Celtic languages, verbs and objects do indeed form constituents – that is, VPs – that may undergo movement.
Further evidence against flat structures for VSO languages comes from subject/object asymmetries in binding relations. If subjects and objects are indeed sisters dominated by the same node (as seen in the tree above), they should be able to enter freely into binding relations with each other, since they are mutually c-commanding. This, however, proves not to be the case: Carnie (1995), citing work by Woolford
2 These languages are a notable exceptions to the general crosslinguistic prohibi- tion against clefted predicates (Heggie 1988, McCawley 1988). SLQZ also prohibits clefted predicates (Lee 1997b).
￼￼￼
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived? 31
(1991), notes that Niuean allows reflexive objects to take pronominal antecedents:
4. Fanan-e ia a iani neafi shoot empf-erg him abs. him refl yesterday “He shot himself yesterday”
(Seiter 1981, p. 80, cited in Woolford 1991)
If it were the case that VSO structures were flat, then this sentence would be ungrammatical: if the object “himself” were allowed to c- command the subject “him”, then a violation of Principle B of the Binding Theory would result. Since this sentence is grammatical, however, it can- not be the case that the object and subject mutually c-command each other.
Similar subject/object asymmetries also occur in SLQZ. The following
￼examples show subject/object asymmetries with the reflexive possessive
,,
marker -ni . -Ni marks nominals to indicate their possession by a preced-
3
ing, non-pronominal nominal. In simple VSO sentences, possessed
objects, but not subjects, may be marked with -ni ,: ,,,,
5. Gw-àa izy Gye eihlly be ts-ni perf-hit Mike brother-refl.poss. “Mikei hit hisi brother”
,,,,
6. *Gw-àa izy be ts-ni Gye eihlly
perf-hit brother-refl.poss Mike “Hisi brother hit Mikei”
This clearly shows that subjects and objects are not in a symmetric relation with each other in either SLQZ or Niuean, and suggests that VSO word order involves more hierarchy than the flat structure in (1) presumes.
3 See Munro (1995) for a detailed description of the distribution and usage of -ni’ .
￼
32 2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
2.2.2 VSO Derived from SVO: An Overview 4
Later alternatives to the flat structure are based on the assumption that VSO word order is derived from SVO word order by additional move- ment (either movement of the verb to the left of the subject, as pro- posed by Emonds 1980, among others); or movement of the subject to the right of the verb (as suggested by Choe 1987 and Chung 1990); or less movement (assuming subjects are generated VP-internally, subjects may potentially remain situ in VP while the verb itself raises to the left of the subject to the inflectional position in which verbs normally sur- face in SVO languages (Koopman and Sportiche 1991)).
2.2.3 VSO Derived by Verb Raising
Emonds (1980) argues that the typological facts of VSO languages support the idea that they are derived by verb raising to a complemen- tizer position, as seen below:
7.
￼CP
C’
C V
￼￼￼IP
￼￼￼DP subj
I’
￼￼￼I
VP
￼￼tv
V’
V DP
tv
obj
￼￼￼In support of this thesis, Emonds cites Greenberg,s Sixth Universal (1966), which claims that all VSO languages also have alternate SVO word order, and his Twelfth Universal, which asserts that languages with
4 A number of the following alternate proposals for deriving VSO word order were developed before Pollock,s (1989) idea (which I have assumed throughout this work) that verbal inflectional material is contained in separate functional projections including tense (TP) and agreement (AgrP). Rather, they follow the older assumption that all inflectional information is contained in a single func- tional projection I(inflection) P. In summarizing these proposals, I will use the terminology of the original work.
￼
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived? 33
predominant VSO word order have clause-initial question particles, while languages with predominant SOV word order do not. Emonds thus associ- ates VSO word order with the presence of clause-initial particles, which motivate verb movement to pre-subject position. The alternate SVO word order available to predominantly VSO languages results from the absence of verb movement.
Parallels have also been drawn between the derivation of VSO word or- der by verb movement from I to C and verb-second languages such as German, which have been analysed as requiring obligatorily filled com- plementizer positions (Den Besten 1983, among others). In matrix clauses, for instance, German verbs raise obligatorily to C, and another constituent (such as an argument or an adverb) raises to a preverbal Topic position:
8. Gestern kaufte Karl dieses Buch
yesterday bought Karl this book
“Karl bought this book yesterday” (Carnie 1995, p. 60)
In clauses containing overt complementizers, however, verbs appear clause-finally:
9. Ich dachte [dass Karl gestern das Buch gekauft hat]
I thought [that Karl yesterday the book bought has] “I thought that Karl bought the book yesterday”
(Carnie 1995, p. 60)
The complementary distribution between overt complementizers and verbs in second position is seen as evidence that verbs in second position land in C. The presence of overt complementizers blocks this movement, thus deriving the verb-final construction in (9).
VSO languages have thus been argued to be “weak” verb-second lan- guages: like verb-second languages such as German, they require verbs to raise from I to C, but unlike German, they do not require the specifier of CP to be filled.
This proposal, however, fails to account for the word order facts of SLQZ. While SLQZ does not use complementizers to introduce embedded clauses, it does require complementizers in relative clauses.5 The following analysis will thus use relative clauses as a diagnostic for the possibility of verb-raising to C in SLQZ. Relative clauses in SLQZ, which obligatorily contain complementizers, still allow VSO word order and actually disallow SVO order:
5 Pamela Munro (p,c,) and Gallant 1995 argue that the SLQZ relative marker nih is indeed a complementizer rather than a relative pronoun.
￼￼
34
2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
10. Studya’aann nih b-dêidy Gye’eihlly li’ebr student rel perf-give Mike book
“the student Mike gave the book to”
’ 11. * Studya’aann nih Gye’eihlly b-dêidy li ebr
￼This suggests that verbs do not raise as high as C in SLQZ relative clauses. (The possibility of VSO word order within relative clauses has also been attested in Irish, cf. Koopman and Sportiche (1991).)
2.2.4 Subject Lowering
Subject lowering has also been proposed as a source of VSO ordering. One such account was proposed for Berber by Choe (1987). She argues that the ordering of the verb, subject, and inflectional elements in examples such as the following point to subject lowering:
12. Ulli t-ttett Tifa iselman
neg.imp 3fs-eat Tifa fish
“Tifa is not eating fish”
(Choe 1987, cited in Carnie 1995, p. 49)
Inflectional elements such as agreement and tense are generally assumed to be generated above VP in a separate inflectional projection (IP) or in a set of separate inflectional projections (such as separate projections for tense and agreement, for instance). Since the inflectional and agreement material precede the verb in Berber, Choe argues that the verb itself remains in situ inside VP. (It is widely assumed that in languages with post-verbal inflectional marking, such as the Romance and Germatic languages, verbs raise out of VP and incorporate with inflectional material in IP (Pollock 1987, among others).) The postverbal position of Berber subjects results from lowering of subjects (which Choe assumes to be generated in the specifier of IP) to a VP-adjoined position:
13.
IP Subj.
I’
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived?
VP
V’
35
￼￼￼￼I
￼￼￼V
Object
If this account is correct, it could potentially account for the ordering of tense/aspect marking and verbs in SLQZ: aspect markers are generated in I, verbs remain in situ, and subjects generated in spec, IP lower to VP and adjoin to it. This would account for both the verb-initial word order of SLQZ and the fact that aspect markers in SLQZ precede verbs.
This analysis, however, poses both theoretical and empirical problems for SLQZ. From a theoretical viewpoint, it violates the ban on rightward movement forced by antisymmetry requirements (which will be outlined in the next section). It is also inconsistent with the contemporary view that subjects are generated as specifiers of VP. From an empirical viewpoint, it fails to account for the fact that the SLQZ verbs and their aspect markers behave as a unit in constructions such as negation: under clausal negation, verbs and their aspect markers appear between two negative morphemes, as seen in (15):
,,
14. B-da u Gye eihlly bx:àady
perf-eat Mike grasshopper “Mike ate grasshoppers”
,,,,
15. Cë ity b-da u-dya Gye eihlly bx:àady
Neg perf-eat-neg Mike grasshoppers ,
“Mike didn t eat grasshoppers”
This suggests that the complex formed by a verb and its aspect marker must be a syntactic constituent, not just two separate, adjacent constituents.
2.2.5 Subject in Situ
Both the verb-raising and subject-lowering accounts of VSO word order outlined above were based on the assumption that subjects are generated as specifiers of IP. VSO word order is thus derived by either raising the verb past IP or lowering the subject to a postverbal position inside or adjoined to VP.
36 2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
More recently, however, it has been commonly assumed (Koopman and Sportiche 1991, among others) that subjects are not generated in inflec- tional projections, but inside the verb phrase itself. (Koopman and Spor- tiche explicitly assert that the subject is generated as a sister of VP, thus forming a small clause with VP, but this is not crucial for the following analysis.) Base-generating subjects VP-internally brings subjects into line with objects, which have long been assumed to be generated VP-internally, and is consistent with the fact that verbs, not inflectional categories such as tense and agreement, subcategorize arguments and de- termine thematic structure.
Under this analysis, VSO results when verbs raise from V to I (through TP and AGRSP, in more contemporary terms), leaving the subject in VP, to the right of the inflected verb:6
16.
IP I’
I VP
DPsubj. V’
V ￼ DPobj
Koopman and Sportiche propose that VSO languages differ from SVO languages in the case marking features of I: in SVO languages, I may case-mark its specifier, thus subjects raise to the specifier of IP to receive case-marking. In VSO languages, on the other hand, I may only assign case by head-government (that is, it can only case-mark directly adjacent arguments in its complement).
6 Koopman and Sportiche argue for an additional segment of VP (Vmax), in whose specifier subjects are generated:
Vm ax DPsubj VP
V’ v
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived? 37
Koopman and Sportiche further differentiate case-marking of specifiers of I (in SVO languages) and case-marking of complements of I (in VSO languages) by claiming that in the former case, I is a “case as- signer by agreement” (that is, it triggers not only nominative case marking on subjects in its specifier, but verbal agreement with the subject as well), and in the latter case, I is a “case assigner by government” (that is, it as- signs structural case but does not trigger agreement). They note that while SVO languages such as English and the Romance languages always show subject person/number agreement on verbs, VSO languages such as Irish and Welsh do not.7 As further evidence for the contrast between case as- signment by agreement and case assignment by government, they note that Standard Arabic, which allows both SVO and VSO word order, only marks subject person/number agreement on verbs when the subject appears preverbally; otherwise the verb receives default (third-person) agreement regardless of the person and number features of the subject.8 In short, when subjects raise to spec, IP, they trigger person/number marking on verbs; when subjects remain below I and receive case-marking by head- government, no agreement is triggered.
They also assert that case assignment by government is restricted by lo- cality. In cases in which other projections intervene between I and the sub- ject inside VP, the subject is required to raise to a higher position in order to be adjacent to I. For instance, in Welsh, a VSO language, subjects sur- face immediately after verbs in sentences with clausal negation:
17. Agorodd y dynion ddim y drws opened-3s the men not the door “The men didn't open the door” (Koopman and Sportiche 1991, p. 234)
They assume that clausal negation originates in a negative projection (NegP) between I and VP:
7 Pamela Munro (p.c.) points out that a number of VSO langauges, such as Gari- funa and Mayan, do have subject agreement on verbs, while a number of SVO languages, such as Wolof and Chinese, lack subject agreement on verbs.
8 A similar correlation between preverbal subjects and verbal agreement occurs in Macuiltianguis Zapotec, which employs predominantly SVO word order and disallows subject agreement when postverbal subjects appear. However, Macuiltianguis Zapotec also allows certain preverbal subjects to appear without agreement markers on the following verb (Foreman 1999).
￼￼
38
2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions 18.
IP
I’
I NegP
opened
Neg’
Neg VP not
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼If the verb “opened” raised past “not” in Neg to I (they presume that ne- gation does not block movement of the verb), leaving the subject in its base-generated position within VP, the wrong word order would result: “opened not the men the door” would surface rather than “opened the men not the door”. Thus, they argue, the subject “the men” must raise out from VP to spec, NegP in order to receive case-marking from I.
There is strong evidence, however, that strict adjacency to the raised verb is not responsible for VSO word order in SLQZ. For one thing, SLQZ allows preverbal (focused) subjects as well as postverbal ones, and front- ing of the subject does not trigger agreement on the verb:
’’
19. B-da uh Gye eihlly gueht
perf-eat Mike tortilla “Mike ate the tortilla”
20. Gye’eihlly b-da’uh gueht
Mike perf-eat tortialla “MIKE ate the tortilla”
It could be argued, however, that since preverbal subjects in SLQZ are always focused or topicalized, the raising of subjects to preverbal position is A-bar movement rather than A movement, and thus does not involve the triggering of agreement.
A stronger piece of evidence against head-government of subjects comes from the behavior of subjects and verbs when certain postverbal markers appear. SLQZ has a large inventory of postverbal markers that at- tach (at least phonologically) to the right edge of verb stems, but precede lexical subjects and pronominal subject clitics.
In the following examples, two such markers appear: -daàa’ n “a lot”, and al “already”. Al “already” may appear either clause-initially, before the verb (21), or postverbally, between the verb and the subject or pro- nominal subject clitic (22):
2.2 How Is VSO Word Order Derived? 39
21. Al b-da,uhw-daàa,n-rëng bx:àady already perf-eat-a.lot-3p.prox. grasshopper “They already ate a lot of grasshoppers
,,
22. B-da uhw-daàa n-al-rëng bx:àady
perf-eat-a.lot-already-3p.prox. grasshopper “They already ate a lot of grasshoppers
In these cases either one or two adverbial markers intervene between the verb and the subject clitic. In (22), it appears that the verb “eat” and the adverbial “a lot” have raised around “already”, leaving the subject clitic stranded. If this is the case, there is no longer strict adjacency between the verb and the subject. Nevertheless, the sentence is still licit, contrary to Koopman and Sportiche's predictions. ,
Another postverbal marker is the clitic -ga , which can be roughly glossed as “instead”. -Ga, may cliticize to either verbs or nouns; nominals marked by -ga , obligatorily appear preverbally (as seen by the ungram- maticality of (24):
23. Lia Oliieb-ga, b-gyàa,a
Ms. Olivia-instead perf-dance
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)”
24. *B-gyàa,ah Lia Oliieb-ga,
perf-dance Ms. Olivia-instead
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)”
25. B-gyàa,ah-ga, Lia Oliieb
perf-dance-instead Ms. Olivia
“Olivia DANCED instead (of doing something else/while waiting for something else to happen)”
In cases when -ga, modifies a verb, preverbal subjects are blocked:
26. *Lia Oliieb b-gyàa,ah-ga,
Ms. Olivia perf-dance-instead
“Olivia DANCED instead (of doing something else)”
This suggests that -ga,occupies a fixed position above the normal land- ing position for verbs, and the constituent it modifies must raise to its left (presumably to pass through the projection -ga, occupies for feature- checking purposes). The preverbal subject is blocked in (24) because rais- ing of the verb past -ga , either places the verb above the preverbal focus projection or otherwise blocks access to it.9
9 The exact position and nature of the projection headed by -ga,is not crucial for the current discussion, and I have deliberately set aside these issues here. See Chapter 4 for an analysis of the syntax of another clitic that behaves similarly
￼￼￼￼
40 2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
If verbs modified by -ga’ do indeed raise out of their normal landing position (assuming that they normally land in the Tense projection), post- verbal subjects would be blocked under Koopman and Sportiche’s account, since the verb does not end up in a position from which it can directly
’
head-govern the subject, and -ga intervenes between the verb and the sub-
ject. Instead, contra the predictions of their account, postverbal subjects are required in these constructions and preverbal subjects are banned, as seen in (24). In short, SLQZ does allow postverbal subjects even when other syntactic material appears between the verb and the subject.
It must be mentioned, however, that only a limited inventory of con- stituents may appear between verbs and subjects in SLQZ (parenthetical expressions and temporal adverbial phrases, for instance, may not appear in this position). Chapters 3 and 4 examine the inventory of functional pro- jections in detail, and motivate some of the co-occurrence restrictions between them.
2.2.6 Summary
This section has outlined some of the previous proposals for deriving VSO word order, and shown that none of these adequately accounts for the behavior of SLQZ. Since SLQZ shows clear subject/object asymmetries, it cannot be presumed to have a flat, tripartite structure. Since SLQZ allows VSO word order even when overt complementizers are present, SLQZ verbs cannot be presumed to raise to C. Since SLQZ preverbal subject constructions don’t trigger subject agreement on verbs, and SLQZ allows some adverbial elements to intervene between sentence-initial verbs and subjects, it can’t be the case that subjects remain in situ in VP and are head-governed by verbs in I. Finally, since SLQZ verbs and their aspec- tual/tense-marking prefixes behave as syntactic units, SLQZ verbs cannot be construed as remaining in situ while subjects generated elsewhere lower into VP. Chapter 3 presents an alternate proposal that more adequately ac- counts for the morphological and word-order constraints of SLQZ.
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994): An Overview
Now I turn to the theoretical framework that will motivate the rest of this work. The field of generative grammar is based on the notion that grammar is truly “universal” in that all language learners begin to acquire their languages with the same innately determined constraints on possible forms a language can take (Chomsky 1957). It has been
(the modal marker-zhya’ )and its use as a diagnostic for the ordering of prever- bal functional projections.
￼￼
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994) 41
widely assumed that the range of possible differences among the world’s languages can be derived from choices in how a number of parameters set by someone acquiring a given language. Since SVO and VSO languages have prepositions and VOS and SOV languages have postpositions, for ex- ample, it often assumed that learners of these two respective groups of lan- guages must learn at an early age that their languages are either “left branching” or “right branching” — that is, complements of locational markers or other pre-/postpositions may appear either before these ele- ments (in left-branching, postpositional languages) or after them (in right- branching, prepositional languages). For instance, the structures for the phrase “by car” in English, a prepositional language, and Japanese, a post- positional language, have traditionally been assumed to be base-generated as follows:
27. English:
PP P’
P NP
car
28. Japanese: PP
P’
NP P
kuruma de (car) (by)
Directionality, then, has been one of the parameters generally assumed to be allowable within the range of possible human languages.
In his 1992 paper and 1994 monograph, Kayne proposes that all lan- guages are underlyingly derived from identical structures. This assumption forces an even stricter set of constraints on what is “universal” about uni- versal grammar. He suggests that all languages, regardless of surface word order, branch to the right and are “antisymmetric”: that is, word order is directly correlated to structural hierarchy. Thus, elements that are higher in a tree structure necessarily precede elements that are lower; high constitu- ents appear on the left of the tree stucture and lower ones on the right. This proposal is represented formally as The Linear Correspondence Axiom (LCA), shown below:
￼￼￼by
￼￼￼￼
42 2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
29. D(A) is a linear ordering of T (Kayne 1994, p. 6)
Here, T is a set of terminal elements, D is the dominance relation among non-terminal elements, A is a set of asymmetrically c-commanding pairs of non-terminals, and D(A) is the set of terminals dominated by A. In other words, all tree structures are binary branching, and all pairs of non- terminals are antisymmetric (one c-commands the other, but not vice versa). Thus, the linear ordering of terminal elements is a direct reflection of the structural hierarchy of the elements that dominate them: a constitu- ent that precedes another in a sentence is necessarily higher than it in the tree structure.
The LCA, then, renders illicit a number of structures previously as- sumed to be allowable. For instance, VSO languages were argued to be derived from ternary-branching structures such as the following, repeated from Section 2.2.1:
30.
This structure violates that LCA by (1) not being binary branching and (2) allowing all its terminals (V and the two NPs) to mutually c-command each other. In short, this structure shows no correlation between linear or- der and structural hierarchy; all its terminals are equally high in the tree structure.
There is empirical, as well as theoretical evidence ruling out structures such as (30) and suggesting the correctness of the LCA. If VSO languages were indeed derived from flat structures such as (30), there should be no subject-object asymmetries in VSO languages, since subjects and objects would mutually c-command each other. As seen in section 2.2.1, however, this proves not to be the case: a number of unrelated VSO languages, in- cluding SLQZ, show patterns indicating that subjects are indeed higher than objects (for instance, examples 5 and 6 in this chapter).
Apparent counterexamples to the LCA, such as the existence of postpo- sitions, can be accounted for by positing movement of a constituent from a lower position (such as the complement position of an underlying prepo- sition) to a higher position (such as a position above this “preposition”, which, because of this reordering of its complement, now surfaces as a postposition). For instance, Japanese postpositional structures such as that in (28) can now be seen as derived from structures like those of English prepositional structures as follows:
￼S
V NP NP
￼
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994) 43
kuruma (car)
Kayne argues that suggestive evidence for movement of comple- ments of “postpositions” in languages such as Japanese comes from the fact that postpositions agree with their complements in a number of left-branching languages, but no such agreement occurs in languages with prepositions. If agreement is assumed to be a reflex of specifier- head agreeement (per Chomsky 1992, among others), the presence of agreeement in postpositional structures supports Kayne's view that com- plements of locational markers have raised to the specifier of PP in these structures.
In short, Kayne argues, differences in word order across the world s languages are not the result of different underlying structures or direc- tionality, but of different movement strategies constrained by the re- requirement that languages be fully antisymmetric. Thus, if Kayne is correct, directionality per se can no longer be considered a parameter selected by different languages.
Kayne argues that this proposal has a number of desirable empirical consequences. X-bar theory, usually considered a primitive of linguistic theory, for example, can be derived by the requirement that word order and structural hierarchy be strictly correlated. Other general constraints, previ- ously considered either stipulations or simply descriptions of gen- eral crosslinguistic phenomena, can also be accounted for under his proposal. Since some of the mechanics of his proposal are assumed (or modified) later in this work, I provide a brief description of them here.
The basic structural relationship that defines the hierarchical and lin- ear ordering of elements under the principles of antisymmetry is c-command. This relationship has long been considered essential in the defi- nition of hierarchical relations such as those involved in binding theory (Reinhart 1981). Exact definitions of c-command vary (Reinhart 1981, Aoun and Sportiche 1983) but the most basic definition of the notion is as follows:
32. A c-commands B iff neither A nor B dominate each other and the first branching node above A dominates B.
This definition makes no assumptions about the categorical status of A, B and the node above A that dominates B. A consequence of this definition is that c-command relations may be bidirectional and structures
￼31.
PP
P’
P NP
de (by)
￼￼￼￼,
44 2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
may be symmetric. For instance, in a structure such as (33) both A and B c-command each other:
33.
C DB
A
The possibility of bidirectional c-command is problematic for the theory of antisymmetry. If linear ordering and hierarchical order are strictly cor- related, and if hierarchical order is defined by c-command relations, then a structure such as the one above, coupled with the preceding definition of c-command, would wrongly predict both that B precedes A (since B c- commands A) and A precedes B (since A c-commands B). Clearly, these two conditions cannot be true simultaneously.
Kayne handles this problem by positing a stricter definition of c- command:
34. X c-commands Y iff X and Y are categories [Kayne s italics] and ’
X excludes Y and every category that dominates X dominates Y. (Kayne 1994, p. 18)
Unless otherwise noted, this is the definition of c-command that I will assume in the rest of this work. In this definition, categories are assumed to be full projections (that is, topmost XP nodes). Thus, segments of cate- gories (that is, X-bars or other non-terminal nodes under an XP) may not c-command other elements.10 Kayne crucially assumes that dominance of one projection (XP) over another (YP) requires that all non-terminal segments of a dominating projection XP dominate YP. The crucial distinc- tion Kayne makes in this definition then, is that only categories (full XP projections) are visible to c-command relations.
10 Kayne, however, assumes that intermediate nodes between terminals and the top nodes of categories are XPs, rather than X-bars, as follows:
XP
XP X
Because nothing in my analysis depends on this distinction, and because X’is a more familiar notation for position, I will continue to use X’in this work.
￼￼￼￼￼￼
35.
ZP
XP WP YP
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994) 45
￼￼￼For instance, in (35), XP, WP, ZP, and YP are categories. ZP dominates XP, WP, and YP. XP c-commands YP since ZP and all other categories higher than XP also dominate YP. For the same reasons, WP c-commands XP. YP, however, does not c-command XP because the first category dominating YP (WP) does not dominate XP. ,
In his definition of c-command, Kayne adopts Chomksy s (1986) defini- tion of exclusion: X excludes Y iff no segment of X dominates Y. The condition that the c-commander and c-commandee exclude each other de- rives the “branching node” condition in older c-command definitions: since WP does not exclude YP in (35), for instance, WP cannot be con- strued as c-commanding YP, even though WP and YP are both categories and every category dominating WP dominates YP.
The requirement that tree structures be completely antisymmetric, with dominance and linear ordering determined by c-command relations as de- fined in (34), results in a highly constrained set of possible structures that is still capable of allowing a wide variety of possible word orderings. Be- cause only full XPs may c-command and be c-commanded, per Kayne’s definition, segments are invisible to calculation of c-command relations, phrasal projections are limited to specifiers (phrasal projections adjoined to the left of other phrasal projections: YP in Figure (36) is the specifier of XP), heads (terminals of phrasal projections, such as X in Figure (36)), and complements (phrasal projections generated as sisters to heads, which appear to the right of heads: ZP in Figure (36), for instance, is the com- plement of XP):
36.
Thus, multiple specifier stuctures, such as multiple adjunctions to the same projection, are ruled out.
XP
YP X’
X ZP
￼￼
46
Structures such as (37) are illicit because the two XPs are not separate categories (that is, they are not independent phrasal projections), but are rather segments of the same category XP (just as X’is also a segment of XP, the lower XP is a segment of the higher XP). Recall from the discus- sion of (34) that segments are defined as “X-bars or other non-terminal nodes under an XP”. Since the lower XP node is not the topmost non- terminal node of XP, it is considered a segment, rather than a distinct cate- gory. YP in (37) asymmetrically c-commands QP, so by the LCA (which links structural hierarchy to linear precedence) YP must precede QP. How- ever, ZP above also c-commands WP, thus wrongly predicting that ZP (and QP, which it dominates) precedes WP. Thus, YP and ZP fail to be de- fined in their linear or hierarchical relation to one another.
A notable consequence of this is that adjuncts are now assumed to be the sole specifiers of the projections they appear in. (Thus, YP in (36) can be considered an adjunct of XP.) Another consequence is that specifiers may c-command out of their projections since they are not dominated by them. For instance, in Figure (38) below, ZP c-commands Y: ZP excludes YP (it does not dominate any segment of YP) and every category that dominates ZP dominates YP. (YP does not dominate ZP in Kayne’s framework because only the top node of YP contains ZP; Y’, the other nonterminal node of YP does not dominate ZP).
￼37
2 Background and Theoretical Assumptions
XP
YP
WP ZP X’
QP X
￼XP
￼￼￼￼38.
XP
YP
ZPY’ X
Z’ Y Z
￼X’
￼￼￼￼￼Thus, Kayne’s definition of c-command correctly posits ZP to c-command and precede Y, and YP to c-command and precede X. Evi- dence that specifiers c-command out of their projections comes from data such as the following:
2.3 The Antisymmetry of Syntax (1994) 47
39. Nobody’s articles ever get published fast enough (Kayne 1994, p. 24)
Negative polarity items such as ever are standardly assumed to be li- censed by c-commanding negative constituents. Here, ever is licensed by nobody, which Kayne assumes to be the specifier of the projection headed by articles.
The possibility of structures such as (38) allows apparent cases of mul- tiple adjunction by allowing adjuncts to appear as specifiers of other speci- fiers: in (38), YP, the specifier of XP, could be an adjunct of XP, and ZP, the specifier of YP, could be an adjunct of YP. For instance, Kayne posits structures such as (38) for cases of from multiple clitic adjunction in French:
40. Jean vous le donnera
Jean to.you it will.give
“Jean will give it to you” (from Kayne 1994, p. 20)
In this sentence, two clitics, vous “to you”, and le “it”, appear to be ad- joined to the same head, donnera “will give”. Kayne suggests that the verb donnera “will give” be posited as the head of XP, le “it” will be the head of YP, and vous “to you” will be the head of ZP in (38). This is shown below in (41):
￼41.
XP
donnera Y’ (will give)
Y’ le (it)
￼YP
X’
￼ZP
Z’
Z
vous (to you)
￼￼￼Thus, all adjunction must now be seen as movement to specifier posi- tions.
The precise mechanics of Kayne’s theory are still a matter of debate (see, for example Koopman (1996) for a potential modification of these structural constraints). Some of Kayne’s basic assumptions and strategies for maintaining antisymmetry, and their applications to SLQZ, are exam- ined in further detail in the following chapters.
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
3.1 Overview
This chapter examines in further detail the verbal morphology of SLQZ, and begins to investigate how SLQZ verbal morphology is reflected in syntactic structure. I argue for a radical approach to verb movement in SLQZ: I demonstrate that the VP, not the V, raises, and that tense, aspect and agreement features are checked by VP raising through the specifiers of the relevant functional projections, rather than V-raising through their heads. Similar strategies have also been independently proposed for other, unrelated verb-initial languages (Chung 1998; Massam (2000); Rackowski and Travis (2000), Davis and Demirdache (1998)).
In brief, the structure I propose is as follows: arguments are generated VP-internally, and raise out of VP into their respective agreement projections:
1.
TP
T’
￼￼￼T
AgrSP DPsubj AgrS’
AgrS AgrOP DPobj AgrO’
AgrO VP
tsubj ...V... tobj
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
50 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
Then the VP itself, containing the traces of its arguments, raises to spec, TP:
2.
￼TP VP T’
￼￼￼￼￼tsubj ...V... tobj
T AgrSP DPsubj AgrS’
AgrS AgrOP DPobj AgrO’
AgrO tvp
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼(The internal structure of VP is described in detail below.)
This movement accounts not only for the verbal morphology of SLQZ, but also for its VSO word order.
I first show that SLQZ inflected verb complexes cannot be derived un- der a standard head-raising analysis, then elaborate upon the VP-raising analysis shown above. I then show how this analysis accounts for both the distribution and structure of verb forms in SLQZ. I also examine evidence that VSO word order and morphological constraints in a number of other languages may likewise be derived from VP-raising.
This analysis has a number of consequences for the grammar of SLQZ overall; this chapter describes how some of SLQZ’s other notable features fall out directly as a result of this analysis.
3.2 SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited: Problems for Verbal Head Movement
In Chapter 1, the verbal morphology of SLQZ is described in detail: verb stems are obligatorily preceded by aspect markers, and followed by subject agreement clitics if their subjects are pronominal. Other morphological material may affix to either the left edge of the verb stem (after the aspect marker) or to the right edge of the verb stem (before the subject agreement clitic). Third-person singular pronominal objects may be expressed as clitics at the rightmost edge of the verb complex.
3.2 SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited 51
Thus, a template for a fully inflected verb in SLQZ (repeated from Chapter 1) would be as follows:
ASP(directional)(causative)VERB(sec.rt)(sec.rt)(adv.)(adv.)(adv.)(SAM) (Obj.clitic)
Deriving a syntactic structure for this configuration, however, raises a number of problems. Adopting the standard assumptions that verbs are in- flected through head-movement and morphemes are affixed in the order in which they occur in the syntax (following Baker’s (1985) Mirror Princi- ple), and (per Kayne (1994)) raised heads can only adjoin to the left of higher heads they raise to, morphemes on the left edge of a verbal com- plex formed by incorporation must be base-generated above those on the right.
This works in the following way: an incorporated complex of mor- phemes zyx is derived from the base-generated structure xyz:
3.
￼XP
X’
XYP x
Y’
Y ZP y
Z’
Z z
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Under the assumptions of the Mirror Principle, the lexical head z adjoins to the left of the head y (right adjunction is banned by antisymmetry):
4.
XP
X’
XYP x
Y’
Y ZP
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Z’ zy
ZY
tz
￼
52
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
The complex head zy then adjoins to the left of x: 5.
XP
X’
￼￼￼￼X
Y Xx Y’
YP
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Z Y ty ZP zy
Z’ tz
Thus, morphemes in incorporated structures surface in the reverse order of their base-generated syntactic order.
The head-movement incorporation strategies just outlined were posited in part to account for the order of verbal morphemes in polysynthetic lan- guages, which show obvious noun incorporation. Baker (1996) notes that polysynthetic languages across a range of language families show a strong parallelism in the ordering of their verbal morphemes: incorporated objects appear to the left of the verb stem, while tense/aspect markers appear to the right of the verb stem. An example of typical verbal morpheme ordering is seen in the following Mohawk sentence:
6. Ra’-wárh-a-k-s-kwe’
MsS-meat-Ø-eat-hab-past
“He used to eat meat” (Mohawk: Baker 1996, p. 30)
In short, verbal morphemes in polysynthetic languages are ordered from left to right in exactly the reverse order as the generally accepted order of their base-generated positions: it is generally assumed that tense and aspect are licensed preverbally high in the tree structure (near the left edge) while objects are generated below (and after) the verb. The head-movement strategy previously outlined, then, allows this ordering of morphemes to be derived from a syntactic structure parallel to that attested in other language types.
This strategy, however, proves problematic for SLQZ (and, as I also show, a number of other VSO languages). Under the assumption that SLQZ verbal inflection is derived by head-movement, a structure consis- tent with the verbal template above (repeated below) would thus look something like this (projections that do not appear obligatorily are in parentheses):
￼￼
3.2 SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited 53
7. ASP(directional)(causative)VERB(sec.rt)(sec.rt)(adv.)(adv.)(adv.)(SAM) (Obj.clitic)
AgrOP AgrSP
(Adv)
(Adv)
(A dvP ) (Sec.RootP)
VP
(CausP)
(Direct.P) AspP
Such a structure is clearly undesirable. First, placement of AgrO above AgrS is virtually unattested in linguistic theory, as is the idea that as- pect/tense inflection is generated below the root verb, and it is unwise to assume that SLQZ can differ from other languages in such crucial ways. Also, it has been convincingly argued that in verbs with causative alter- nates (such as run in Mike runs versus causative run in Mike ran the horse around the track), the projection serving the causative function is directly above, not below the root verb (cf. Hale and Keyser 1993, Kural 1996, Chomsky 1995, among others).
Another option is that heads may adjoin to either the left or right edge of the verbal head as it raises up through the structure. Thus, the Aspect and Causative heads would adjoin to the left edge of the verb, and the others adjoin to the right edge. Such an approach is problematic for several reasons. First, it clearly violates the spirit (if not the etter) of the Mirror Principle: since the ordering of morphemes on the verb would only partially reflect their ordering in the tree structure, there would be no way of telling whether the left-adjoining morphemes are generated higher or lower than the right-adjoining ones. Second, it clearly violates Kayne’s (1994) Linear Correspondence Axiom (LCA) by forming structures that branch in more than one direction. Although it has been suggested (Potter 1995) that languages may select the direc- tionality in which adjoined heads surface at PF (some languages spell out adjoined heads at the left edges of phonological structures at PF,
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
54 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
others to the right), it is not possible under Potter’s theory for a language to spell out material in both directions simultaneously.
A final, and potentially simplest, option would be to adopt a non- ordered feature-checking approach, consistent with Chomsky 1995: contra Baker, Kayne, etc., features checked by movement may be checked in any order, and feature-checking is not constrained by the physical ordering of morphemes. This would be the best option to adopt if it were the case that inflected verbs in SLQZ behaved consistently like heads in all contexts. There is, however, clear evidence that this is not the case. Some of this evidence is presented in the following section.
3.2.1 Evidence Against Head-Movement of SLQZ Verbs
There are a number of syntactic contexts in SLQZ in which verbs and XPs may appear interchangeably. Below I discuss three of these: modification by second-position adverbial clitics, constituent negation, and verbal com- pound formation.
Adverbial Clitic Placement
One piece of evidence against the head status of inflected SLQZ verbs comes from the distribution of second-position adverbial clitics: they may modify DPs as well as inflected verbs. The clitic -zhya’, used to express epistemic modality, for instance, may affix to either verbs (as seen in (8) below) or to DPs, as seen in (9).
8. N-u’-zhya’-rëng Lohs Aa’nngl neut-exist-might-3p.prox Los Angeles
“They might be in Los Angeles (temporarily)” [e.g., it might the case that they are in Los Angeles]
9. Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’-rëng
Los Angeles-might neut-exist-3p.prox
“They might be in LOS ANGELES “
[e.g., Los Angeles is where they might be/live]
In the following examples, the adverbial clitic -ga’, “instead/for the time being” also attaches to both DPs and verbs:
￼￼￼
3.2 SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited 55
10. Lia Oliieb-ga’ b-gyàa’ah
Ms. Olivia-instead perf-dance
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)”
11. B-gyàa’ah-ga’ Lia Oliieb
perf-dance-instead Ms. Olivia
“Olivia DANCED instead (of doing something else/ while waiting for something else to happen)”
The preceding four examples show that the scope of the adverb (and thus the interpretation of the sentence) varies according the constituent it is affixed to. In (8), where the modal clitic -zhya’ appears attached to the sen- tence-initial verb “exist”, the modality takes scope over the entire event denoted by the VP (the event of being in Los Angeles is a possible state of affairs). When -zhya’ “might” is attached to sentence-initial “Los Ange- les” (in (9)), the modality takes scope only over “Los Angeles” (e.g., “Los Angeles might be the place where they are”).
The differing placement of -ga’ “instead/for the time being” in (10) and (11) results in similar contrasts. In (11), for example, -ga’ “instead” takes scope over the nominal “Ms. Olivia”, indicating that Olivia was the par- ticipant selected to dance instead of someone else. In (10), -ga’ takes scope over the verb “dance”, with the meaning that Olivia chose dancing instead of another activity. In other words, -ga’ serves to distinguish the constitu- ent it modifies as an object or activity selected out of a set of possible al- ternatives.
These examples suggest that adverbial clitics occupy a fixed syntactic position, and that constituents that they modify raise to their left. A syntac- tic, rather than morphological, account of cliticization is supported by the fact that the appearance of any of these clitics in a sentence will constrain possible word orders. Arguments modified by certain adverbial clitics (such as -ga’ “instead/for the time being”), for instance, must appear preverbally, rather than in their canonical postverbal argument positions:
12. Lia Olieb-ga’ b-gyàa’ah Ms.Olivia-instead perf-dance
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)”
13. *B-gyàa’ah Lia Olieb-ga’
perf-dance Ms. Olivia-instead
“OLIVIA danced instead (of someone else)”
This suggests that constituents modified by such adverbial clitics are required to raise to some higher position (above the position in which verbs without adverbial clitics ordinarily surface) in order to license the relation between themselves and the adverbial. Thus, at least some adver- bial clitics must be generated (or have their features licensed) above
￼￼￼
56 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
the position where inflected verbs generally surface at PF, which I assume to be TP.1
This possibility is supported by other word-order constraints imposed on sentences whose verbs appear with certain adverbial clitics. Verbs cliti- cized by -zhya’, for instance, disallow preverbal subjects:
14. B-da’uhw-al-ru-zhya’ Gye’eihlly bx:àady perf-eat-already-more-might Mike grasshopper “Mike might have already eaten more grasshoppers”
15. *Gye’eihlly b-da’uhw-al-ru-zhya’ bx:àady
Mike perf-eat-already-more-might grasshopper “Mike might have already eaten more grasshoppers”
SLQZ subjects may appear fairly freely in preverbal position when given contrastive focus readings. I thus assume the existence of a high (pre-TP) functional projection for syntactic focus movement (FocP); fur- ther evidence for this will be outlined in Chapter 4. The fact that argu- ments may not appear preverbally in constructions such as (15) suggests that the verb has raised to the left of the adverbial clitic and landed in a po- sition at least as high as the preverbal focus projection.
Thus, there is strong evidence that at least some adverbial clitics force the raising of constituents they modify. As seen above, either DPs or in- flected verbs may be targeted for movement. The parallel constraints on both types of constituent suggest that the syntactic processes they must undergo must also be parallel: thus, either inflected verbs must be treated as XPs, or other phrasal constituents treated as heads.
I will assume for the moment that the class of adverbial clitics that force movement of the constituents they modify are generated as heads of spe- cific functional projections. A constituent modified by an adverbial suffix such as -ga “instead” (such as “Ms. Olivia” in (12), for instance) raises to the specifier of the projection occupied by -ga’, thus licensing its relation with the adverbial by specifier-head agreement:
16.
Lia Oliieb (Ms. Olivia)
￼AdvP
DP Adv’
￼￼￼￼￼Adv TP -ga’ .....
(instead)
This movement results in the modified DP or verb surfacing to the left of the adverbial suffix. The fact that both DPs and verbs appear in the
1 The idea that adverbs are generated in their own functional projections is explored in detail by Cinque (1998).
￼
3.2 SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited 57
same structure with the same syntactic effects (both trigger the same con- straint against preverbal focus) suggests that they undergo the same kind of movement. This suggests, then, that SLQZ verbs may undergo the same movement as XPs such as DPs, and supports the view that SLQZ verbs are indeed VPs.
Identical Negation Patterns for Verbs and XPs
Further evidence against the head status of inflected verbs comes from their distribution and behavior under negation. SLQZ negation is most commonly expressed by two discontinuous morphemes; negated constitu- ents appear between these two elements. Standard clausal negation in SLQZ, for instance, consists of a clause-initial negative morpheme cë’ity followed by the negated verb and the morpheme -dya’ (which I leave un- glossed for the moment) then the subject or pronominal subject agreement marker:
17. Cë’ity ny-àa’izy-dya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb neg subj-beat-dya’ Mike Felipe “Mike didn’t hit Felipe”
Under standard assumptions about clausal negation (Pollock 1989, Zanuttini 1991, among others), negated verbs raise into the head of NegP. In cases of standard clausal negation in SLQZ, this does not seem prob- lematic.
A head-movement account of clausal negation, however, fails to account for other common negation structures in SLQZ. Contrastively focused verbs, for instance, may be negated with the negative element a’ti’ instead of cë’ity:
18. A’ti’ gw-àa’izy-dya’Gye’eihlly Li’eb, b-cuhni’-ëng Li’eb neg perf-hit-dya’ Mike Felipe perf-kick-3s.prox Felipe “Mike didn’t HIT Felipe, he KICKED Felipe.
It could be claimed that the only difference between (17), the negated sentence with cë’ity, and (18), the sentence with negated contrastive focus (with a’ti’) is that a’ti’ appears instead of cë’ity. The verb, along with the negative element -dya’, raises by head-movement to the head of NegP in both constructions.
This, however, poses problems for other constructions with the negative morpheme a’ti’. A’ti’ is most commonly used to negate adjectival and nominal predicates, as well as contrastively focused constituents and prepositional phrases. In these constructions, a’ti’ precedes, and -dya’ follows, the negated constituent:
￼￼￼
58 19.
20.
21.
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
A’ti’ Sann Luu’c-dya’ gw-èeh Pa’amm
neg San Lucas-dya’ perf-go Pam
“Pam didn’t go to SAN LUCAS (but rather somewhere else)” (DP)
A’ti’ cuann tenedoor-dya’ b-da’uw Gye’eihlly gueht neg with fork dya’ perf-eat Mike tortilla “Mike didn’t eat tortillas with a fork”
(PP)
A’ti’ bùu’nny zyùall-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly neg man tall -dya’ neut-be Mike “Mike isn’t a tall man”
(DP/NP)
￼Since proper names (such as Sann Luu’c “San Lucas”) are presumably DPs, rather than Ns or Ds, the idea that any material that appears between a’ti’ and dya’ is a head is problematic. The appearance of clearly phrasal elements such as cuann tenedoor “with a fork” between a’ti’ and dya’ is further evidence against the idea that a’ti’ constructions are derived by head-movement of negated constituents into NegP. Equally problematic is the possibility of allowing either heads or XPs to participate in this con- struction. The fact that inflected verbs pattern with clearly non-head-like constituents under focus negation indicates that they should be treated as XPs, rather than heads. (Detailed syntactic structures for SLQZ negative constructions will be proposed in Chapter 4.)
One could logically assume, then, that the same type of movement takes place in all cases of a’ti’ negation: either head movement or XP movement to a specifier position. Thus, as with the adverbial suffixation cases outlined previously, either inflected verbs behave like XPs and raise to specifier positions, or XPs such as the PPs and DPs above are treated like heads in the syntax and undergo head-movement. I will adopt the first option, and show that it accounts for not only the word order and mor- pheme ordering facts of SLQZ, but of other VSO languages as well. The latter option was explored by Carnie (1995). I will return to his proposal, as well as an alternate account for the data he presents, in the appendix to this chapter.
There are also morphological arguments against treating SLQZ verbs as heads. The most obvious argument against it is that it fails to account for the ordering of SLQZ verbal morphemes; as I will show in Section 2.2.2, the XP-raising analysis does account for this.
Absence of Head-Movement Effects
Another piece of morphological evidence against the head status of phrasal units in SLQZ is the absence of head-movement/incorporation effects in the formation of SLQZ words. The word ryu’lààa’z “likes”,
3.2 SLQZ Verbal Morphology Revisited 59
for instance, consists of two morphemes: ryu’uh “enters” and lààa’z “heart”. If it were the case that verbs were heads, ryu’lààa’z would have to be posited to be the result of incorporation, with the head ryu’ “enters” raising and left-adjoining to the head lààa’z “heart”:
22.
* NP N’
N VP
V N V’ ryu’ lààa’z
enter heart t
Such incorporation, however, would wrongly form a nominal, rather than a verbal, element since lààa’z, the head of the compound, is a noun.
Another option would be to assume that incorporated heads may adjoin to the right, rather than the left, of the higher head. In this case, lààa’z “heart” would incorporate into ryu’ “enter” , thus forming a compound properly headed by a verb:
23.
* VP V’
V NP
V N N’ ryu’ lààa’z
enter heart t
Structures such as (23) violate the LCA by allowing multidirectional branching. I thus assume that such structures are illicit. Furthermore, even if right adjunction were a legitimate option, it would be highly inconsistent with the strongly left-branching, head-initial architecture of SLQZ.
Munro, Lopez et al (1999) list a number of SLQZ verbal expressions that clearly exemplify this problem. One such expression is ruhnybyùùzh “tears into little pieces”. This verb is composed of two morphemes: ruhny “make/do” and byùuzh “meat pieces on chicharrones”. Thus, it is clearly derived from an expression with byùuzh as the syntactic object of “make”.
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼
60 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
Compounds such as ryu’lààa’z and ruhnybyùùzh are treated as single grammatical units with fixed, non-compositional meanings in SLQZ. Sub- jects and subject agreement markers follow both morphemes (and may not appear between the morphemes), and their composite morphemes cannot be broken apart by syntactic processes such as adverbial cliticization. Sec- ond-position clitics such as -zhya’ “might”, for instance, may not break up compounds containing lààa’z:
24. B-yannlààa’z-zhya’ Gye’eihlly n-gyaàa’nn Gye’eihlly bèe’cw perf-forget-might Mike subj-feed Mike dog “Mike might have forgotten to feed the dog”
25. *B-yann-zhya’-lààa’z Gye’eihlly n-gyaàa’n perf-forget-might Mike subj-feed “Mike might have forgotten
Gye’eihlly bèe’cw
Mike dog
to feed the dog”2
Adverbial suffixes, if present, must appear after the secondary root lààa’z , as seen in the grammaticality contrast between (24) and (25). Thus, compounds with lààa’z are treated as single grammatical units.
The inviolability of these compounds, however, can be accounted for without treating them as heads. It is well known, for instance, that English phrasal idioms such as “kick the bucket” also resist syntactic extraction:
26. *What did Mike kick? (on idiomatic reading)
27. *Mike’s bucket was kicked by the Mafia.
Nevertheless, “kick the bucket” has the internal structure of an ordinary VP, and behaves like a standard VP in the structures in which it appears. Di Sciullo and Williams (1988) reconcile the semantic irregularity and grammatical regularity of phrasal idioms by calling them “listed syntactic units”: they are constructed according to normal rules of syntax, but are given special status as “listed” lexical items (that is, items whose meanings are noncompositional, and thus must be given their own listings in the lexicon). This analysis can be extended to verbal compounds such as ryu’lààa’z in SLQZ.
2 SLQZ, like other Zapotec languages, regularly allows apparent Principle C vio- lations such the binding of “Mike” by “Mike” in these examples. The second, bound copy is not referential and behaves semantically like a bound variable. This phenomenon is described in detail in Lee 2003.
￼￼￼￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 61
This raises the issue of why nominal expressions such as lààa’z and byùuzh in the compounds shown above are not forced to raise out of VP into agreement projections, as do other nominals generated within VP. A possibility is that these expressions are blocked from raising out of VP for the same reasons “bucket” cannot be extracted from the idiomatic VP “kick the bucket”: since “bucket” is not referential in this context, it can- not be questioned or manipulated in the same way as a normal syntactic object. The fact that “bucket” may not be modified for number agreement (“*Careless drivers kick their buckets every day”) suggests that it may not even raise to AgrOP, where such features are checked, in the contexts in which it appears. If this is the case, then lààa’z “heart” in ryu’lààa’z and byùuzh “meat pieces on chicharrones” in ruhnybyùuzh may likewise be posited to be nonreferential: since there are no actual hearts or meat frag- ments involved in either of the verbal expressions described above.3
To sum up, there is no way to derive the correct form of multimor- phemic verb roots such as ryu’lààa’z “like” by head movement. The fact that even compound words show the morpheme ordering of phrases strongly argues against the possibility that they might be heads. This, along with the syntactic distribution and other morphological features of SLQZ verbs, support the idea that SLQZ verbs are XPs rather than heads.
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ
The previous sections showed why no workable clause structure for SLQZ could be derived if inflected verbs were posited as heads: they appear in- terchangeably with nominal and prepositional phrases in a number of syn- tactic constructions, and their morphological structure cannot be derived by head movement. This section will propose and show an actual basic tree structure for SLQZ and show how it accounts for the seemingly irregular distribution and form of inflected verbs.
Such a structure must meet two criteria: first, for learnability reasons, it must not diverge radically from the basic structures posited for other languages. In other words, a child learning SLQZ as a first language must acquire not a radically different tree structure, but simply a different mecha- nism for deriving the correct position of the verb. Second, this structure must also be able to account for, in a principled way, all the possible varia- tions of verbal form caused by verbal suffixes.
The basic structure I propose is as follows:
3 I leave aside the interesting question of why idioms such as “take advantage of ” do allow syntactic manipulation (e.g, “Advantage was taken of John’s weak ness”).
￼￼
62
CP
C’
N egP
N eg’
MoodP Mood’
TP
T’
AspP
Asp’
AgrSP AgrS’
AgrOP AgrO’
AgrO VPasp
V’
(VPcaus) V’
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
￼28.
￼￼￼C
￼￼￼Neg
￼￼￼Mood
T
￼￼￼￼￼￼Asp
AgrS
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼V
￼￼￼V
V
VPstem V’
￼￼where VPasp is headed by a light verb that serves to mark tense, aspect, and occasionally mood (this to be justified and further explained below); VPcaus is headed by a causative verb marker (cf. Hale and Keyser 1993, Kural 1996, Chomsky 1995) when the verb is causative/transitive, and VPstem is headed by the verb stem itself. (As previously noted,
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 63
there are a number of other projections that may appear below VPasp, inside the verbal complex, but these are omitted for the preceding tree for exposi- tional simplicity. There is also evidence for a number of projections above NegP, rather than a single position CP (consistent with proposals by Rizzi 1996, among others). Detailed evidence for split CP projections will be given in the next chapter.
Thus, the inflected verb that raises to TP is the set of VP shells domi- nated by VPasp. Subjects and objects, which are generated within the VPs, raise out to AgrSP and AgrOP, respectively. The VP, containing the traces of these arguments, then raises through the specifier of AspP (where aspec- tual features are checked) to the specifier of TP, where tense features of the verb are checked.
In the following subsections, I will account for the ordering of func- tional projections proposed above. First, I will address the internal structure of the VP complex itself; then I will discuss the ordering of the remaining clausal projections.
3.3.1 Projections within the VP Complex
The Tense/Aspect Marker
The leftmost morpheme in the SLQZ verbal complex is the obligatory marker for tense, aspect, and mood. If, as argued, inflected verbs in SLQZ are raised VPs rather than raised Vs, then the only way to derive aspect markers on the left edge of the verb is to generate them there as part of a higher VP shell. This higher VP projection, then, must be that in which the actual “aspect markers” of SLQZ are generated: VPasp in the tree above. (VPasp is not to be confused with AspP, which is a separate, higher projec- tion in which VPasp is licensed.) The light verb in VPasp has aspectual fea- tures that are checked by movement of the VP complex dominated by VPasp through AspP and (depending on its form) tense features checked by movement through TP.
The internal structure of a simple VP consisting of a verbal stem and as- pect marker, then, is as follows (abstracting away from the base-generated positions of extracted arguments):
￼
64
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
￼29.
VPasp
V’
V b-
perf.
V tàa’z
hit
￼￼￼VPstem
￼V’
￼This VP complex dominated by VPasp, then, is what raises through AspP and TP to appear clause-initially in structures such as the following:
30. B- tàa’z Gye’eihlly Li’eb perf-hit Mike Felipe “Mike hit Felipe”
The representation of aspect markers as verbs is not unprecedented. Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria (1997) note that Basque progressives are formed with the verb “be engaged in”:
31. Anaia leihoa apur-tze-n ari da
Anaia window break-NOM-in engage AUX (be)
“Anaia is engaged in breaking the window/Anaia is breaking the window”
(Basque: Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997, p. 5)
The verbal status of the constituent expressing Progressive aspect in Basque is also consistent with their proposal that Aspect is predicative as well as locative.4
4 Suggestive evidence for the verbal status of SLQZ aspect markers comes from the homophony between certain aspect markers and verbs with similar meanings. The progressive marker ca-, for instance, closely resembles the word caa, which can be used either as the question word “where” or as a verb meaning “to hang” or “to be spread around over”. A diachronic relation between these elements would be consistent with the proposal that progressive markers in a number of languages are historically derived from expressions of spatial location (Bybee, et al (1994), cited in Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997.)
￼
Directional Markers
32.
VPasp
V’
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 65
￼The directional markers, reduced forms of rìe’d “come” and rihah “go”, appear after the tense/aspect markers and before the causative marker and verb stem. Thus, in verbal complexes with directional markers, the tense/aspect marker appears on “come” and “go”, rather than on the verbal stem itself. I assume that directional markers are generated as heads of their own verbal projections, above the verbal stem and causative marker, but below the tense/aspect marker. Ridta’uh “comes and eats”, for in- stance, has the following internal structure:
￼￼￼VPdir (hab) V’
V VP id
(come)
In the following examples from ML, for instance, the habitual aspect marker r- appears before the directional marker, rather than directly on the verb stem:
V
r-
￼￼￼￼V’
￼33.
34.
35.
36.
r-canzàa hab-wander.around “wanders around”
r-i-canzàa hab-go-wander.around “goes and wanders around”
r-a’uhw hab-eat “eats”
r-id-ta’uhw hab-come-eat “comes and eats”
V ta’uhw
(eat)
66 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
This patterning is superficially reminiscent of what Jaeggli and Hyams (1993) dubbed ‘aspectual’ “come” and “go” constructions in English. These constructions, like the SLQZ examples above, involve “come” and “go” taking verbal complements without any tense inflection of their own:
37. Come talk to me
38. Whenever I have time, I go watch a movie
SLQZ directional markers, however, are far less constrained syntacti- cally and semantically than English aspectual “come” and “go”. For one, SLQZ directional markers may take a full range of tense/aspect prefixes, while aspectual “come” and “go” may not show any tense or agreement marking:
39. *You came talk to him yesterday
Unlike their English counterparts, SLQZ directional markers are not re- stricted to constructions with volitional subjects:
40. *Pieces of driftwood come wash up on the shore
41. Calii loo r-id-dicah nnyihs?
where at hab-come-appear water?
“Where does the water come out?” (ML 1999)
Jaeggli and Hyams suggest that aspectual “come” and “go” assign sec- ondary theta roles to their subjects, thus leading to the constraint that only volitional subjects may appear in these constructions. This is clearly not the case in SLQZ: ML list a number of other commonly used verb forms with directional markers in which no agentivity is required of the subject (as seen above) . This suggests that SLQZ “come” and “go” are interpreted as purely directional, and do not assign secondary theta roles to the sub- jects of the verbs they modify.
I leave aside a more detailed analysis of these constructions for future research.
The Causative Projection
The morphological causative marker surfaces directly to the left of the verbal stem. As described in the previous chapter, this marker takes a number of forms: it either appears as a distinct morpheme (often s- or z-) or as fortition of a lenis initial stem consonant. Examples (42) and (43)
￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 67
show the addition of the causative morpheme z- on the left edge of the verb stem; examples (44) and (45) show causation marked by fortition of the stem-initial lenis consonant zh:- to x:- :
42. r-ihnnih hab-get.light
“gets light” (of the sky, before dawn)
43. r-z-ihnnih hab-caus-get.light
“turns on (a light)”
44. r-zh:ùu’nny hab-run
“runs”
45. r-x:ùu’nny hab-caus.run
“makes (something) run”
Many SLQZ morphological causatives are transitive alternates of mo-
nadic predicates best translated in English as passives.5 46.
￼Non-causative
rihihw “gets ground up” rzh:ììi’ “is milked, is squeezed, is wrung”
ryèe’t “is called”
Causative
rziuhw “grinds up, pulverizes” rx:ììi’ “milks, squeezes, wrings”
rzèe’t “mentions, calls”
￼￼Following a number of accounts (Hale and Keyser 1992, Kural 1996, Baker 1996 among others), I posit this causative marker to be the head of a VP shell that takes the verbal stem as its complement. Because causative markers appear after aspect and directional markers, I assume they head a VP shell below VPasp and VPdir, but above VPstem:
5 Munro (course lectures, 1997) notes, however, that the semantic relation between causative/non-causative verb forms in SLQZ is often idiosyncratic and not strictly causative, even though the addition of an additional argument to thematic grid is generally involved: for instance the morphological causative alternate to rguèe’ll “gets fast, does fast” is rsaguèe’ll “is kind enough to, does a favor and”.
￼
68
SLQZ also has a periphrastic causative construction formed with the verb “make”:
48. Laarëng b-èèi’ny-rëng b-zh:ùu’nny caba’i 3p.prox perf-make-3p.prox perf-run horse “They made the horse run”
The periphrastic and morphological causative constructions show con- trasts in meaning as well as form. While periphrastic causative construc- tions express the idea of indirect causation, their morphological causative counterparts imply a stronger causative relationship between the causer and causee. This contrast appears in the following examples: the first an example of a periphrastic causative construction, the second its morpho- logical causative version:
49. B-èèi’ny Li’eb [y-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly] perf-make Felipe irr-dance Mike “Felipe made Mike dance”
50. B-z-yàa’ah Li’eb Gye’eihlly
perf-cause-dance Felipe Mike
“Felipe made Mike dance/ Felipe danced Mike around”
The first sentence can mean Felipe enabled Mike to dance by paying his fees for a dance contest, for instance. The second can only mean that Felipe physically dragged Mike onto the dance floor and danced him around. I will call the first reading the “indirect” causative reading, and the second the “direct” causative reading.
The correlation between indirect and direct causative readings and peri- phrastic and morphological causative constructions has been noted crosslinguistically. Kural (1996) notes that such correlations hold in Hun- garian and Turkish, for example. I assume, following Kural, that periphras- tic causative constructions in SLQZ are biclausal (as indicated by the brackets in (49)), and morphological causative constructions are mono- clausal. A detailed examinination of causative constructions in SLQZ is outlined in Casillas (1995).
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
￼47.
VPasp VPdir
VPcaus VPstem
￼￼￼￼￼￼
Secondary Roots
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 69
￼SLQZ verbs may contain bound morphemes that appear on the right edge of the verbal stem, but before adverbial suffixes and subject agreement markers. These markers, which differ from other postverbal suffixes in that they attach only to verbs and not to other constituents, have been labelled “secondary roots” by Munro (course lectures, 1997).
Secondary roots, as their name implies, also differ from adverbial suf- fixes in that their presence is obligatory in certain lexical entries: certain secondary roots are thus not productive. A number of SLQZ verbs (mostly denoting propositional attitudes and emotional states), for instance, are formed with the secondary root lààa’z “heart”, whose use is not produc tive:
51. Some verbs formed with the secondary root lààa’z ryu’lààa’z “likes”
(ryu’uh “enters” + lààa’z “heart”) rinèelààa’z “keeps in mind”
(rinèe “takes”+ lààa’z “heart”) rza’clààa’z “wants”
(?? + lààa’z “heart”)
rzalààa’z “remembers, is aware of ”
(?? + lààa’z “heart”)
rnnàa’azlààa’z “does a good deed for”
(rnnàa’az “grabs,touches”+ lààa’z “heart”) rni’ìi’bylààa’z “worries, is concerned”
(rni’ìi’by “moves”+lààa’z“heart”) rgwinylààa’z “feels sad, feels sorrowful”
(?? + lààa’z “heart”)
In some cases, the first part of these compounds can be identified as an independent verb: the first morpheme in rni’ìi’bylààa’z “worries” is the verb rni’ìi’by “moves, makes a movement”, the first morpheme in rinèelààa’z “keeps in mind” is the verb rinèe “takes, takes along”; and the first morpheme in ryu’lààa’z “likes” is the phrasal (phonologically short- ened) form of the verb ryu’uh “enters”.
In other cases, the semantic contribution of the first morpheme of the compound is less clear: ML’s dictionary lists no independent entry for rgwiny (nor anything that looks enough like it to be a possible source for it), for instance.
70 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
Another example of a secondary root is rrei’cy/ arrei’cy “upside down”.
52. Z-èei’by-arrei’cy-ëng def-hang-upside.down-3s.prox
“It’s hanging upside down” (ML, p.281)
This is an example of a secondary root which, unlike lààa’z , may be used productively. This also shows that secondary roots include a number of grammatical categories: they may be nominal (as is lààa’z) or preposi- tional (as is rrei’cy/ arrei’cy )
I thus consider verbs containing secondary roots to be verbal compound words.
Secondary roots also appear to be syntactically, as well as semantically, bound to the verb theme: they raise along with the verb theme in contexts involving verb movement, such as negation. In (53), the verb “forget”, formed with the secondary root -lààa’z “heart”, behaves as a single unit that undergoes movement under clausal negation:
53. Cë’ity n-yaannlààa’z-dya’ Gye’eihlly neg subj-forget-dya’ Mike “Mike didn’t forget
n-gyaan Gye’eihlly bèe’cw subj-feed Mike dog
to feed the dog”
I will assume that secondary roots are generated in XP shells below the main verb: this forces them to raise when the higher VP raises.
The Comitative Applicative Markernèe
Another commonly used secondary root is the comitive applicative marker nèe , which may also appear on the right edge of the verb. Nèe differs from secondary roots such as lààa’z in that its use is productive. Nèe in- creases the valence of the verb by allowing the presence of an additional argument, generally an additional subject or, less commonly, a direct ob- ject participant. For this reason, I gloss it “with”. Below are some typical examples of its usage (examples provided by Munro (p.c.)):
54. B-da’uw-nèe Li’eb Gye’eihlly gueht perf-eat-with Felipe Mike tortilla “Felipe ate tortillas with Mike”
￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 71
55. B-da’uw-nèe Li’eb bzyààa’ gueht perf-eat-with Felipe bean tortilla “Felipe ate tortillas with beans”
As these examples show, the added argument appears immediately after the main subject: the added subject “Mike” appears immediately after the subject “Felipe” in (54), and the added object “beans” likewise appears immediately after the subject (but before the direct object “tortillas”) in (55). The fact that arguments introduced by -nèe, regardless of their own thematic status as added subjects or objects, occupy a fixed position be- tween subjects and direct objects suggests the existence of a specific li- censing projection for comitative arguments. This projection must be dis- tinct from the position in which indirect objects appear, since indirect objects obligatorily surface after direct objects, not before them:
56. B-dëihdy Gye’eihlly bx:àady Li’eb perf-give Mike grasshoppers Felipe “Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe”
57. *B-dëihdy Gye’eihlly Li’eb bx:àady perf-give Mike Felipe grasshoppers “Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe”
The latter example can only have the reading “Mike gave Felipe to the grasshoppers”.
Additional indirect objects generally may not be introduced with nèe:
58. B-dëihdy Gye’eihlly bx:àady Li’eb perf-give Mike grasshoppers Felipe “Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe”
59. *B-dëihdy-nèe Gye’eihlly bx:àady Li’eb Lia Oliieb perf-give-with Mike grasshoppers Felipe Ms.Olivia “Mike gave the grasshoppers to Felipe and Olivia”
(While (59) is ungrammatical with the interpretation shown, it is allow- able if “Felipe” is construed as an added subject participant. An allowable interpretation, then, would be “Mike, along with Felipe, gave the grass- hoppers to Olivia”).
The only exceptions to this constraint are certain unergative verbs such as “talk” and “sing”, which allow indirect objects (such as “Olivia” in (60) and “Felipe” in (61)) to be introduced by nèe :
60. Al w-nii-nèe Gye’eihlly Lia Oliieb already perf-talk-with Mike Ms. Olivia “Mike already talked to Olivia”
￼
72 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
61. B-ìi’lldy-nèe Gye’eihlly Li’eb perf-sing-with Mike Felipe “Mike sang to Felipe”
Interestingly, the latter example could mean either “Mike sang to Felipe” (in which case Felipe is an observer of the singing) or “Mike sang with Felipe” (in which case Felipe is a participant in the singing). This is reminiscent of the similar ambiguity of speak with in English: “Mike al- ready spoke with Olivia” could mean either Mike and Olivia participated equally in the conversation or that Mike merely told Olivia something and she only listened.
Nèe appears after any other secondary roots that may appear (such as lààa’z “heart” and rrei’cy “upside down” in the examples below), but be- fore adverbial suffixes such as the modal suffix -zhya’ “might”:
62. R-gàa’lààa’z-nèe’-ng Gye’eihlly hab-gets.caught.heart-with-3s.prox Mike
“He sighs with Mike” (P. Munro, p.c.)
63. Z-uurrei’cy-ni-a’ Gye’eihlly def-stand.upside-down-with-1s Mike
I’m standing upside-down with Mike (P. Munro, p.c.)
64. Z-auw-nèe-zhya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb gueht def-eat-with-might Mike Felipe tortilla “Mike might eat tortillas with Felipe”
Although nèe’ superficially resembles applicative markers in other lan- guages (that is, it is a verbal affix that licenses the presence of an addi- tional argument), its usage is confined to comitative contexts: it cannot, for example, introduce benefactive or instrumental arguments, as do appli- cative markers in other languages:
65. W-nnààaz Gye’eihlly bx:àady cuann gyìihx perf-catch Mike grasshopper with net “Mike caught grasshoppers with a net”
66. *W-nààa’z-nèe Gye’eihlly gy:ihx bx:àady pef-catch-with Mike net grasshopper “Mike caught grasshoppers with a net”
The constraint against applied benefactive/instrumental arguments licensed by nèe is also reflected in the possible interpretation of the follow ing:
￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 73
67. Xi b-da’uhw-nèe-u’ gueht? what perf-eat-with-2s.inf tortilla “What did you eat tortillas with?”
This can only be interpreted as “what other food did you eat besides tortillas?”. It could not be followed up felicitously with an answer such as “with a fork”, for example.
Nèe may also appear sentence initially. In this context, it has the mean- ing “too”, and takes scope over the immediately following nominal argu- ment, which appears preverbally:
68. Nèe Li’eb b-da’uhw bx:àady
too Felipe perf-eat grasshopper
“FELIPE ate grasshoppers, too” (along with other people)
69. Nèe bx:àady b-da’uhw Li’eb
too grasshopper perf-eat Felipe
“Felipe ate GRASSHOPPERS too” (along with eating other things)
Thus, apart from the cases with “sing” and “talk”, nèe does not contribute additional thematic roles to a sentence. Rather, it expresses the presence of additional entities that appear in parallel with already licensed arguments.
Now I address the question of the syntactic status of nèe. Since it raises along with verbs it modifies (as seen in (64), where it raises along with a the verb to the left of the modal clitic zhya’) it must form a syntactic unit with the verb. The fact that nèe raises along with the verb it modifies is also seen in negation constructions, where the verb and nèe appear be- tween the two morphemes used to express clausal negation:
70. B-gyàa’a-nèe Lia Oliieb Gye’eihlly pehr cë’ity perf-dance-with Ms. Olivia Mike but neg “Olivia danced with Mike, but she didn’t
n-gyàa’a-nèe-dy-ëng Li’eb subj-dance-with-neg-3s.prox Felipe dance with Felipe”
This suggests that nèe, like the secondary roots, is generated as a com- plement of the verbal stem:
￼
74
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
VPasp VPcaus
VPstem
XP
nèe
￼71.
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼I will set aside the question of the exact categorial status of nèe. Appli- cative markers have been analyzed as incorporated prepositions (Baker 1988, den Dikken 1993) or as higher predicates that take the VP and its ar- guments as its own arguments (Baker 1996, Pearson 1997, Nyonyani 1996). Since these analyses were mostly motivated by the syntactic and semantic behavior of benefactive, rather than comitative, constructions, it is probable that they may not be relevant for the analysis of nèe.
If nèe is indeed generated as a complement of the verbal stem, this fact would have a number of consequences for the internal structure of the rest of the VP. For one, it raises the question (which I have not yet addressed specifically) of exactly where in the extended VP structure subjects and objects are generated. If the projection headed by nèe is generated as a complement of the verbal stem, then objects of transitive verbs—which have standardly been assumed to be generated as complements of verbs— would have to be generated elsewhere.
Consider, for example, a sentence with nèe and a transitive verb:
72. B-da’uhw-nèe Gye’eihlly ra mnii’iny gueht perf-eat-with Mike plur child tortilla “Mike ate tortillas with the children”
Here, there are three arguments (“Mike”, “the children” and “tortillas”) that must be generated in VP, and that must raise out of VP to their respec- tive agreeement projections before the VP itself raises to TP. Thus, a pos- sible structure for the VP “eat with” in (72) might be as follows:
￼73.
VP asp V’
Vasp VP b
(perf) DP
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 75
V’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Gye’eihlly
(Mike) -da’uw
V
(eat) X’
XP
￼￼￼X DP nèe
(with) ra mnii’iny (the children)
The problem is clear: the subject, “Mike”, can be assumed to be gener- ated as the specifier of the VP headed by “eat”. The comitative phrase headed by nèe is generated as the complement of “eat”. This, however, leaves no logical place for the object, “tortillas”, to be generated. Although there are two empty specifier slots left in the tree (the specifiers of XP and VPasp), neither would be a plausible place to generate the object: for one, the presence of nèe or an aspect marker does not entail that the sentence at hand will contain a direct object (since nèe may appear with intransitive verbs and aspect markers appear obligatorily in SLQZ). Constraints against generating arguments in random, non-selecting projections have been well motivated in linguistic literature: among these is the Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH) (Baker 1988):
74. Identical thematic relationships between items are represented by identical structural relationships between those items at the level of D-structure.
(Baker 1988, p. 46)
Since direct objects are selected by the semantic requirements of the verb, it follows from the UTAH that all direct objects must be generated in the same structural relation with the verb. Clearly, projections that appear with all verbs (such as VPasp) or those that appear only optionally, and with verbs of varied valences (such as the projection headed by nèe) , do not meet this requirement.
Thus, direct objects, which are specifically selected by transitive verbs, must be generated within the VP headed by the transitive verb itself. If the optional comitative projection is generated as a complement of VP, as ar- gued, this suggests that transitive verbs contain more layers of structure
￼
76 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
than assumed so far, and one of the projections in this structure houses the direct object.
The idea that verbs, even those that appear monomorphemic, may be underlyingly constructed from multiple VP projections, has been moti- vated by both syntactic and semantic factors (Larson 1988, Hale and Keyser 1994, Kural 1996). Kural, for instance, posits the existence of “elementary predicates” (realized in the syntax as phonologically null verbs) with inchoative and causative functions: when combined with spe- cific lexical items via incorporation, these predicates determine the va- lence and interpretation of the verb. For instance, the English verb “sink” may have either an inchoative, intransitive reading (as in “the boat sank”) or a transitive, causative reading ( as in “the navy sank the boat”). The dif- ference in meaning and argument structure between these forms results from the presence of phonologically null causative or inchoative predi- cates. Hale and Keyser likewise posit the existence of phonologically null verbal heads that contribute to the syntactic and semantic structure of verbs: one configuration that they propose is that transitive verbs consist of two embedded VPs, with the agent generated as the specifier of the higher (causative) VP and the theme (affected argument) as specifier of the lower VP:
￼75.
VP agent
￼￼V’
￼￼VP
V
V’
￼￼theme
V
￼The verb itself raises through both VPs. (For instance, a verb that may surface in a structure such as (75), for instance, is “shelve” as in “Mike shelved the books”.
If we assume, then, that transitive verbs such as “eat” contain two em- bedded VPs (not counting VPasp), then an additional position for the gen- eration of direct objects emerges: the specifier of the lower VP. Thus, the
base-generated structure for (72), “Mike ate tortillas with the children”, would be as follows:
VPcaus
V’
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 77
￼76.
VPasp V’
V b-
(perf) DP
Gye’ eihlly V (Mike)
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼gueht
(tortilla) -da’uw
(eat)
XP
X’
X DP nèe
(with) ra mnii iny
(the children)
DP
VPstem V’
￼￼￼V
￼￼￼￼A possibility I will consider is that the VP shell in which subjects of transitive verbs are generated is the causative projection previously de- scribed. This would mean that all transitive verbs in SLQZ have active causative projections, even if they have no overt phonological expression. This possibility is consistent with that proposed by Hale and Keyser (1994).
This structure also suggests that the added argument is not coordinated directly with any of the other arguments: in (76), for instance, the added subject argument “the children” is not syntactically coordinated with the actual subject “Mike”. This idea is supported by the fact that both addi- tional subjects and objects introduced by nèe surface in the same position between AgrSP and AgrOP, as seen in (54) and (55). The fact that this po- sition (which I take to be an oblique case-licensing agreement projection) is not associated with any particular thematic role suggests that arguments that land there must be taken to be syntactically distinct from actual sub- jects and objects. (It could be argued that the exact thematic interpretation of arguments introduced by nèe is determined only by context.) The status of arguments introduced by nèe, then, could be considered roughly analo- gous to the status of optional agent/experiencer arguments introduced with “by-phrases” in English passives: while arguments introduced with “by” are interpreted as external arguments, they behave syntactically as oblique arguments, and differ semantically from typical external arguments in that their presence is purely optional.
78 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
Another issue raised by the structure in (76) is the base-generated posi- tion of the argument introduced by nèe: if all other arguments are gener- ated as specifiers, why is the argument introduced by nèe generated as a complement? This can be justified by the behavior of preverbal nèe in examples such as (77), repeated from above: when fronted to preverbal posi tion (and given the reading “too”), nèe always precedes the argument it introduces:
77. Nèe Li’eb b-da’uw bx:àady
too Felipe perf-eat grasshopper
“FELIPE ate grasshoppers, too” (along with other people)
78. *Li’eb nèe b-da’uw bx:àady Felipe too perf-eat grasshopper “FELIPE ate grasshoppers, too”
This suggests that nèe and the argument it introduces raise together as a unit. The fact that nèe is used in these contexts to introduce actual subjects and objects, rather than additional subject or object participants, suggests that nèe in these cases might be base-generated, along with the argument it precedes, in the specifier of one of the VP shells, rather than as an embed- ded complement of VP itself. For instance, in (76), the subject XP nèe Li’eb “Felipe too” may be generated in the specifier of VPcaus:
￼79.
VPasp
V’
V
This in turn suggests that the projection headed by nèe, whatever it may be, is not a VP: the fact that nèe can be base-generated in argument posi- tions, and that it is generated to the left of, rather than to the right of, the argument it introduces shows that it neither select arguments nor is gener- ated in the syntax, like a normal VP.
￼￼￼VPcaus nèe Li’ eb V
￼￼XP
V’
￼￼￼VPstem V’
V
￼￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 79
3.3.2 Matrix Clause Projections
Now I turn to the hierarchical structure of the remainder of the matrix clause. I assume the basic relationship and ordering of Tense and Agree- ment proposed by Pollock (1987). Since negation is generally clause-initial in SLQZ, I assume NegP is high (per Zanuttini 1989, among others).
The placement of MoodP above TP is motivated by the fact that SLQZ modals appear directly above verbs, and no lexical material may in- tervene between modals and verbs:
￼80.
81.
Naa pahr g-àa’p Gye’eihlly muully pahr ch-ïlle’eh be for irr-have Mike money for irr-be.allowed “Mike has to have money in order
j-ieed Gye’eihlly nor’ty irr-come Mike north
to come to the US”
*Naa pahr Gye’eihlly g-àa’p muully pahr ch-ïlle’eh be for Mike irr-have money for irr-be.allowed “Mike has to have money in order
j-ieed Gye’eihlly nor’ty irr-come Mike north
to come to the US”
The placement of MoodP below NegP is motivated by the fact that there are a number of cases in which the modal interpretation of verbs is changed under negation (Lee 1996). Negation is clause-initial in SLQZ; thus, negated verbs must raise above their normal landing position (TP) in order to reach NegP. This change in modal interpretation under negation suggests that negated verbs must raise through MoodP in order to reach NegP, and in cases where modal features are active (such as when one of the three modal aspect markers is selected), the verb will receive a modal, rather than non-modal interpretation.
Verbs marked with Irrealis aspect, for instance, receive modal, rather than non-modal, interpretations under the standard clausal negation pattern exemplified in (17). Recall from Chapter 1 that verbs with Irrealis aspect may have either “non-modal” or “modal” interpretations: the non-modal interpretation, which surfaces when Irrealis-marked verbs appear in non- negated matrix clauses, is an indicative future reading, as shown below:
82. G-wùa’ll-rëng li’ebr Irr-read-3p.prox books “They will read the books”
80 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
The “modal” reading of the Irrealis corresponds to some uses of the subjunctive in Romance languages, or the reading of infinitival comple- ments of intensional verbs in English:
83. R-e’ihpy Lia Pa’amm làa’rëng g-wùa’ll-rëng li’ebr hab-tell Ms. Pam 3p.prox irr-read-3p.prox book “Pam told them to read the books”
The modal reading of Irrealis verbs is blocked in matrix clauses, which always get the indicative future reading.
This constraint is both semantically and syntactically motivated. As- suming Farkas’ (1995) model in which subjunctive clauses represent events that take place in sets of possible worlds introduced by an inten- sional predicate, then the presence of subjunctive-like readings of SLQZ Irrealis verbs in matrix clauses can be ruled out as redundant: matrix clause predicates are uttered in (and are presumed to be true in) the actual world of the speaker; they do not denote any possible worlds except the actual one.6 A matrix predicate such as runs in John runs, for example, can only be interpreted to mean that John is running in the actual world of the speaker and listeners, not that he is running in some hypothetical situation. If modal readings are triggered by the raising of verbs to a pre-TP Mood projection, then raising of verbs to Mood in matrix clauses can be ruled out for reasons of economy: the extra move in unnecessary for the meaning of the sentence.
The modal reading surfaces obligatorily when Irrealis-marked verbs undergo standard clausal negation, as seen below:
84. R-e’ihpy Lia Pa’amm làa’rëng hab-tell Ms. Pa’amm 3p.prox “Pam told them
cë’ity g-wùa’ll-(dya)-rëng li’ebr neg irr-read-(dya’)-3p.prox book not to read the books”
“Pam told them they will not read the books”
6 An obvious exception to this generalization is the case of conditional clauses (such as “If Mike comes early, tell him to wait for us”). Subjunctives are com- monly licensed in conditional clauses crosslinguistically. In SLQZ, Irrealis verbs in clauses introduced by bàllnah “if” receive modal, rather than non- modal readings.
￼￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 81
A distinct ordering of negative morphemes surfaces when Irrealis verbs with non-modal (indicative future) readings are negated:
85. Cë’ity-dy-ënn y-da’uhw-ënn gueht neg-dya’-1p irr-eat-1p tortilla “We won’t eat tortillas”
In contrast to the standard clausal negation pattern exemplified in (17) and (84), when Irrealis verbs with future readings are negated, the mor- phemes used to express negation, cë’ity and dya’ , appear adjacent to each other, rather than on either side of the verb. Another difference is that pronominal subject agreement markers appear twice: once on the verb, and once directly after -dya’. (In the previous example, for instance, the first-person-plural marker -ënn obligatorily appears twice.) Lexical sub- jects may also appear twice, but are only required after
-dya’:
86. Cë’ity-dya’ Jwaany g-a’uhw (Jwaany) gueht neg-dya’ Juan irr-eat (Juan) tortilla “Juan won’t eat tortillas”
A syntactic structure for this alternate negation pattern will be given shortly.
The need for this alternate structure is a direct result of the interaction between MoodP and NegP: as seen in (84), Irrealis verbs are interpreted with modal, rather than non-modal, readings when raised to NegP. This suggests, as previously argued, that MoodP intervenes between the stan- dard landing spot of non-negated matrix verbs (TP) and NegP. The rele- vant movement of the VP through MoodP into NegP for (84), for example, is shown below:7
7 Iposit the placement of the negative marker -dya’ as the head of NegP for con- venience here. Its exact position, and reasons for its position, will be discussed in Chapter 5.
￼￼
82
3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
N egP
QPi ￼ ￼ ￼ Neg’
￼87.
￼￼Q’ Neg dya
Q VP Cë’ity
neg gwùa ll
MoodP
ti TP
￼￼￼￼￼ti ￼ ￼ AgrSP DP
￼￼￼￼-rëng 3p.prox
AgrOP DP ti
li’eb r books
￼Thus, a syntactically distinct construction must come into play when a negated Irrealis verb is to preserve its non-modal (future) interpretation.
This raises the question of what exactly is the underlying structure of the negated future Irrealis pattern in (85) and (86). The structure can be ac- counted for as follows: Since the Irrealis verb itself cannot raise to NegP without passing through MoodP and thus receiving a modal interpretation, it remains in TP. The CP containing the Irrealis verb is embedded under a higher clause in which a covert existential predicate undergoes clausal ne- gation. Thus, the underlying structure for a simple negated future Irrealis sentence such as (88), is as follows:
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 83
88. Cë’ity-dya’ Gye’eihlly y-tòo’oh ca’rr neg-dya’ Mike irr-sell car “Mike won’t sell the car”
N egP
N eg’
Neg MoodP
-dya’
Mood’
Mood TP
T’
T AgrSP
DP LP Gye’eihlly
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼(Mike)
Q’
Q VP cë’it y
(n eg)
V CP (exist )
ytòo’oh tsubj ca’rr (sell ca r )
In this structure, the matrix clause verb is a covert existential predicate negated by cë’ity. The QP headed by cë’ity, with the covert existential as its complement, raises through TP and MoodP into spec, NegP. In order for this to occur without the complement of the covert existential (the em- bedded CP) raising to NegP as well, the embedded CP must raise to the position marked LP. A full explanation of this position and its functions will be presented in the following section.
The Irrealis VP remnant ytòo’oh “will sell” remains in spec, TP of the embedded clause. The embedded clause object “car” also remains in the embedded clause. The subject “Mike” raises out of the embedded clause into AgrSP of the matrix clause. This movement is motivated by two factors. First, since the covert existential verb is not a theta-assigner, it can act as a raising predicate. Second, Irrealis comple- ments with modal readings behave as restructuring predicates in SLQZ; arguments generated within them may undergo long-distance movement normally disallowed from full complement clauses, such as focus
QP
￼￼￼￼V’
￼￼￼
84 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
movement and A-movement of subjects out of the clause (see Lee 2003 for details.)
This structure for Irrealis negation not only enables the lower verb “sell” to remain in TP, it also gives the right semantic interpretation: the negated covert existential verb takes scope over the event denoted by the embedded clause, giving the reading “there exists no future event of Mike selling the car”.
The presence of a covert existential verb between the two negative markers in the higher clause is consistent with the fact that the verb nu’uh “exists” may be phonologically null in negated contexts:
89. N-u’-ng neut-exist-3s.prox
“He exists”
90. Cë’ity n-u’-dy-ëng
neg neut-exist-dya’-3s.prox “He doesn’t exist”
91. Cë’ity -dy-ëng neg-dya’-3s.prox
“He doesn’t exist”
The Position of Embedded Clauses
This structure, however, raises a crucial question for the VP-movement proposal: if matrix predicate (the XP containing the silent existential verb) raises to spec, TP, then to spec, NegP, then how can the embedded clause with the Irrealis verb remain stranded below the two negative particles? Since it is a complement of the matrix verb, wouldn’t it be forced to raise through the matrix clause to NegP as well?
The only way to derive the proper linear order of the sentence above under a VP-raising account is to raise the embedded CP out of the matrix VP to some higher projection (XP) before this VP raises to NegP:
92.
XP
VP
V’
V CP
While this may appear to be an ad hoc mechanism to save the VP- raising theory, it has independent theoretical motivation in earlier work on case and theta-role assignment of complement clauses (Emonds 1978,
￼￼￼￼￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 85
Stowell 1981, among others). More recently, the raising of complement clauses to higher projections has been posited as a means of handling ap- parent cases of right-adjunction in a manner consistent with the principles of antisymmetry (Kayne 1997, Koopman (course lectures), Koopman and Szabolcsi 1998).
Stowell (1981) notes that while gerund clauses may appear as objects of prepositions and as subjects of complements of exceptional case- marking verbs, tensed clauses may not:
93. He blamed it [on [Bill’s being too strict]] (Stowell 1981, p. 148)
94. *He blamed it [on [that Bill was too strict]] (Stowell 1981, p.149)
95. I consider[ [John’s having come home] to be fortunate]] (Stowell 1981, p. 149)
96. *I consider [ [ that John came home] to be fortunate]] (Stowell 1981, p. 149)
Furthermore, tensed-clause complements may not appear directly after tensed verbs; they must appear after any other complements that appear:
97. Paul knew from experience [that the law was unfair]
98. ?*Paul knew [that the law was unfair] from experience
He postulates that the ungrammaticality of (94), (96), and (98) can be attributed to the clashing requirements of case and theta-role assignment in these structures. He assumes the following requirement for theta role as- signment (proposed in Chomsky 1981):
99. Theta-roles can only be assigned to A-chains that are headed by a position occupied by PRO or Case
(Chomsky 1981, cited in Stowell 1981, p. 111)
Case assignment, however, is subject to a number of constraints, among them the following:
100. The Case Resistance Principle (CRP):
Case may not be assigned to a category bearing a Case-assigning feature
(Stowell 1981, p. 141)
￼￼
86 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
Among the case-assigning categories is Tense. Thus, tensed clauses are among the categories subject to the CRP, and are thus blocked from appearing in case-marked positions.
The ungrammaticality of (94) and (96) can thus be accounted for. The tensed clause subjects of the embedded clauses cannot receive case under the CRP. Because they do not receive case (and are not PRO), however, they also fail to be properly theta-marked. The derivations thus crash. Likewise, (98) is ruled out by the CRP: the tensed-clause complement con- tains a case-assigning feature, but is in a position in which it may receive case-marking itself.
Stowell notes however, that there are a number of cases in which tensed clauses appear as subjects or complements of tensed verbs in appar- ent violation of the CRP:
101. [That Brian dyed his hair] proves nothing (Stowell 1981, p. 152)
102. Paul already knows [that Jim lives with his sister] (Stowell 1981, p. 159)
In the case of tensed-clause subjects, he suggests (adopting earlier ideas by Emonds (1976) and Koster (1978) that the tensed clause raises to a higher Topic position. This is supported by the fact that tensed clause sub- jects only appear in constructions in which topics can also appear, and are blocked in environments in which topics may not appear (such as inside relative clauses):
103. *John’s belief [[that you took the course] helped you] is un- founded
(Stowell 1981, p. 153)
Stowell proposes that tensed clause complements of tensed verbs, such as that in (102) are also extraposed from their base (case-marked) position. He suggests (following Emonds 1976) that these extraposed clauses move rightward to a postverbal position to fulfill the CRP. This accounts for clause-final position of the tensed-clause complements in (102).
Thus, the idea that clausal complements must move to positions dis- tinct from their base-generated positions is not new or theoretically unmo- tivated. Stowell’s proposals can be easily updated to be consistent with Minimalist principles and antisymmetry constraints: most obviously, it must be assumed that tensed complement clauses raise leftward, not rightward, to fulfill the CRP. Also, the CRP itself can be restated in terms of feature licensing conditions: since case-assignment is now as- sumed to be licensed by spec/head agreement within AGR rather than by head-government by the verb stem, we must assume that tensed clause complements must appear in positions distinct from nominal complements because they cannot receive the case features assigned by
￼
3.3 VP-Raising and Constituent Structure in SLQZ 87
AGR. (Alternately, as suggested Hilda Koopman (p.c.), raised complement clauses may move through, but not remain in, case-marking agreeement projections. In other words, clausal complements of tensed verbs raise to a licensing projection analogous to AGR, but that differs from the nominal agreement licensing projections in that it does not assign case.
This projection, which I will call L(icencing)P (LP) (following Koopman and Szabolczi 1997) must be fairly low in the matrix clause, since clausal complements follow subjects and objects of matrix verbs:
104. B-quiilly Li’eb Gye’eihlly [y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr] perf-persuade Felipe Mike [irr-sell Mike car]
“Felipe persuaded Mike to sell the car”
I will tentatively assume that LP is directly below AgrOP.
More on Root Clause Constituent Order
Now I return to the ordering of other projections within the matrix clause. From the preceding account of Irrealis future negation, it follows that MoodP must be above TP: if it were below TP, then Irrealis verbs (as well as verbs markers with other modal aspects) would always be required to pass through and activate MoodP, and would always have only one, modal interpretation. As seen in the first part of this chapter, this is not the case. The placement of the modal projection above TP is also consistent with Barbiers’ (1995) proposal that Dutch modals with non-epistemic readings take IP (=TP) complements.
Rizzi (1996), among others, has proposed that CP, like IP, should be viewed as a set of separate functional projections, including Focus and Topic, among others. There is strong evidence to support this in SLQZ. I will return to the internal structure of CP in Chapter 4.
The embedding of AspP under TP was proposed in Lee 1996 (and in- dependently, in greater detail, by Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria (1997)). Both of these accounts motivate this structure by observing that Aspect describes the temporal status of an event within a certain time frame: for example, a sentence with past tense such as “He built a house” describes an event temporally ordered before the time of speech (or before some other contextually salient time). Aspect describes the status of an event within a time frame denoted by Tense: “He was building a house”, for example, denotes an event that was in progress during a past time.
Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria further suggest that Aspect is a predicate that selects a subpart of a time interval denoted by Tense: They define Progressive aspect, for example, as “a spatio/temporal predicate with the meaning of (with)in”. Thus, the Progressive aspect in “He was building a house” selects a time frame within the past event of house-building. This time frame excludes the beginning and endpoints of
￼
88 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
the event; thus, no implication can be made as to whether the house in the sentence was actually completed or not.
They further support this proposal with crosslinguistic and diachronic evidence. A number of languages (such as French, and Dutch, for in- stance), use prepositional phrases to express progressive events:
105. Jean est en train de courir
Jean is in along of running
“Jean is running”
(French: Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997, p. 5)
106. Ik ben het huis aan het bouwen
I am the house at the build
“I’m building the house”
(Dutch: Demirdache and Uribe-Exteberria 1997, p. 5)
Thus, there is crosslinguistic evidence that natural languages treat As- pect as having locative-like functions (Progressive Aspect, for instance, locates events within a given time frame) and in some cases, expresses As- pect in the grammar as a locative. This will be a crucial point in the deri- vation of Aspect in SLQZ.
Summing up, the structure for a simple sentence in SLQZ can be de- rived as follows: below is the base VP shell structure for (107):
107. B-z-yàa’ah Li’eb Gye’eihlly perf-caus-dance Felipe Mike “Felipe made Mike dance”
￼VPasp V’
V b-
(perf) DP
(Felipe) V z-
(caus) DP
￼￼￼VPstem V’
￼￼￼￼￼L i’ed
VPstem V’
￼￼￼￼Gye’eihlly (Mike)
V Yaa’ah (dance)
3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 89
The subject, Li’eb, “Felipe”, base-generated in the specifier of the causative VP, raises to spec, AgrSP, and the object, Gye’eihlly, “Mike”, base-generated in the specifier of the VP stem, raises to spec, AgrOP. The entire VP complex then raises to the specifier of AspP, then to the specifier of TP:
￼108.
VPasp V’
V
B- (perf) ti
TP
￼￼T’
￼￼￼￼T
AgrSP AgrS’
￼￼￼￼VPcaus DP Liebi
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼V
Z (caus)
V’
tj
(Felipe) AgrS AgrOP
DP AgrO’
VPstem V’
V Yàa’ah (dance)
Gye’eihllyj
(Mike) AgrO tvp
￼￼￼￼￼This model accounts for the linear ordering of morphemes in SLQZ verbs in a manner consistent with both the LCA and the Mirror Principle. VP-raising accounts have also been suggested as a means of deriving the word order of SOV languages such as Japanese in an antisymmetric framework (Nakajima 1996 and Pearson 1997), as well as the ordering of verb phrases in complex sentences in Hungarian (Koopman and Szabolcsi 1998). Like the account just proposed for SLQZ, these proposals assume that lexical material raises out of VP before VP-raising takes place. Naka- jima’s account differs from the above in that it posits that the verbal head itself raises out of VP via head-movement, and the remnant VP contains the arguments, which remain in their theta-positions throughout the deriva- tion. These accounts assume that the underlying tree structure for SOV languages is essentially identical to that of SVO languages, and the crucial difference between them is the choice of movement strategies used to de- rive the surface word order. Similar assumptions drive this analysis of VSO word order in SLQZ .
3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations
The preceding analysis of SLQZ VP-raising raises the larger issue of whether VP raising is responsible for VSO word order crosslinguistically.
90 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
There is strong evidence that this may be the case, at least for some VSO languages. In the following section, I show that the morphology and word order constraints on a number of unrelated VSO languages can be accounted for by VP raising. Interested readers may refer to the previous analyses of the derivation of VSO word order in the previous chapters.
3.4.1 VP-Raising and VSO: Crosslinguistic Evidence
The preceding chapter showed that previous analyses for deriving VSO word order fail to account for the word order possibilities of SLQZ. Now I address the question of whether the VP-raising proposal given for SLQZ can account for VSO word order and verbal morphology in other lan- guages.
There is strong evidence that it can. Many VSO languages unrelated to SLQZ pose similar syntactic and morphological problems for verbal head movement analyses. Just as SLQZ allows verbs and XPs to participate in- terchangeably in a number of syntactic constructions, VSO languages as genetically distinct as Irish (Carnie 1995) and Chamorro (Chung 1998) likewise allow verbs and phrasal non-verbal predicates to participate in the same constructions:
109. Is [np ambráni [cp aL bhuailfidh an píobaire ti] c song COMP play.fut the piper
(é) “Yellow Submarine” agr
“Yellow Submarine” is a song which the bagpiper is going to play”
(Irish: Carnie 1995, p. 194)
110. Nang, kao ti ginin i gima’ yúyu’us hao?
Mom Q not from the house God.Prog you “Mom, weren’t you (coming) from the church?” (Chamorro: Chung 1998, p. 55)
In the Irish example, Carnie argues that the predicate “a song which the bagpiper is going to play” occupies a position normally occupied by a ver- bal head. In the Chamorro example, the PP “from the church” is marked with progressive aspect (realized as reduplication of the primary stressed open syllable) in the same way as a verbal predicate would be.
While Chung independently concludes that both verbal and non- verbal predicates in Chamorro should be treated as XPs, Carnie proposes
￼
3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 91
that phrasal predicates in Irish be treated as heads.8 I will discuss Carnie’s proposal in the appendix to this chapter.
A number of VSO languages also show verbal morphology patterns which, like those in SLQZ, cannot be accounted for by head movement. A common (though not universal) feature of VSO languages, for instance, is the presence of preverbal tense/aspect markers. As previously argued for SLQZ, this ordering cannot be derived by verbal head-movement if the Mirror Principle and principles of antisymmetry are to be maintained, and if standardly held assumptions about the ordering of functional projections such as TP are to hold. Under standard head-movement accounts of verb- movement, tense markers are incorporated into verbal heads when the verb raises into the head of a higher Tense projection. Head-movement models of verb-movement account for the verbal morphology of languages such as English and French, where tense/aspect morphemes follow the verb. However, if morpheme ordering is necessarily a “mirror image” of syntactic hierarchy (and only left adjunction is possible), then the existence of prever- bal tense/aspect markers that form syntactic units with verb stems is problematic: if head-movement is assumed, then either the verbal head right-adjoins to the tense morpheme generated higher in the tree (violating antisymmetry) or the tense morpheme itself is generated lower than the verb, and itself raises and left-adjoins to the verb. This ordering of TP is unattested in the literature.
Now I will address a few specific cases: A number of Eastern Polyne- sian languages (e.g., Hawaiian (Elbert and Pukui 1979), Easter Island (Chapin 1978)) show an ordering of morphological material on verbs par- allel to that of SLQZ. That is, the verbal stems are preceded by tense/aspect and causative markers, and followed by adverbial markers, applicative markers, and agreement:
111. Ua ‘a pono ‘ia keia pila perf caus-proper-passive this bill “This bill was approved”
(Hawaiian: Elbert and Pukui 1979)
It should be noted, however, that the inventory of verbal morphemes available in these languages does not correspond exactly to that of SLQZ. What is crucial for the analysis to follow is the relative order of tense and causative marking on the verb stems: as argued earlier in this chapter, such ordering is impossible to derive under standard head-movement accounts of verb movement, if left adjunction is assumed to be the only option.
8 Chung, however, explicitly argues against the existence of a single underlying structure for all VSO languages.
￼￼
92 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
Chapin (1975) posits the following template for Easter Island inflected verbs:
112. Tense/aspect -Head -Adverb -ro Prog. Deictic PVD
where ro is an “individual marker” which “expresses the idea that the action referred to is one which was imposed on the subject, not carried out voluntarily”, Prog. appears in progressive constructions, and PVD is one of four “postverbal demonstration” particles. (From the examples in Cha- pin’s work, it appears that only the tense/aspect marker and head are man- datory in all verbal constructions.) Easter Island, then, also shows a pat- terning of verbal morphemes similar to that of SLQZ: tense/aspect marking to the left of the verbal stem, and adverbial suffixes/clitics to the right. As previously argued for SLQZ, such ordering cannot be derived under stan- dard head-movement analyses of verb movement, if the standardly ac- cepted ordering of functional projections is to be maintained.
Thus, there is suggestive morphological evidence that other VSO lan- guages may also employ VP-remnant movement as their verb-movement strategy. In the next sections, I will show syntactic evidence supporting this possibility.
Polynesian Subject Clitics
Further evidence for VP-raising as a possible basis for VSO word order is the distribution of second-position clitics in Polynesian languages. In Sa- moan and Tongan, both VSO languages, subjects generally follow the verb, which is preceded by a tense/aspect marker:
113. na’e puke ia past sick she
“She was sick”
(Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 83)
114. ‘olo’o tautala lemu ia ‘oe prog. talk soft that you “You’re speaking softly”
(Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 86)
Pronominal subjects, however, may appear as clitics between the tense marker and verb. Cliticized subjects take a distinct morphological form from their non-cliticized counterparts, and form a phonological word with the tense marker:
115. na’e ne puke past she sick
“She was sick”
(Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 83)
￼
116. ‘olo’o ‘e tautala lemu prog. you talk soft “You’re speaking softly” (Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 86)
Objects and oblique arguments may not appear in this preverbal posi tion:
117. na’e ui ia ‘e he tangata past call her erg the man “The man called her” (Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 85)
118. *na’e ne ui ‘e he tangata past her call erg the man “The man called her” (Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 84)
119. sa tausi latou e le teine
past care them erg the girl “The girl took care of them” (Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 88)
120. *sa latou tausi e le teine
past they care erg the girl “The girl took care of them” (Samoan: Chung 1976, p.88)
Further constraints on subject cliticization vary between the two lan- guages. In Samoan, non-emphatic pronominal subjects are obligatorily cli ticized. Emphatic subjects may not appear as preverbal clitics. Subject cliticization of third-person singular subjects of intransitive verbs is also disallowed:
121. ‘olo’o tautala lemu ‘oia prog talk soft she
“She’s speaking softly” (Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 89)
122. * ‘olo’o ia tautala lemu
prog she talk soft
“She’s speaking softly” (Samoan: Chung 1976, p. 89)
In Tongan, on the other hand, cliticization of pronominal subjects is obligatory except for third-person singular pronominal subjects, which may cliticize optionally. (The constraints on third-person singular subjects
3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 93
￼
94 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
are intriguing, but beyond the scope of the present work. I will leave them aside for future investigation.)
While Samoan disallows cliticization of emphatic subject pronouns, Tongan does allow pronominal subjects with emphatic or contrastive read- ings. In these cases, however, pronoun doubling occurs: a second pronoun (in full, non-clitic form) appears postverbally:
123. na’a ma ‘ave ‘e kimaua ho’o telefone past we=du take erg we=du your telephone “WE took away your telephone”
(Tongan: Chung 1976, p. 83)
These data suggest that VP-raising can be posited for Tongan and Sa- moan as well. While cliticization of this type is generally viewed as raising of the cliticized pronoun, I propose that the cliticized, non-case-marked subject clitics are in fact in situ pronominal subjects inside VPs raised to TP. The following tree reflects the proposed structure for the Tongan ex- ample in (115), na’e ne puke, “She was sick” (functional projections for aspect, mood, etc. omitted for clarity). Here I assume that in Tongan, as in SLQZ, fronted VPs are dominated by VPasp, which contains the preverbal tense/aspect marker:
￼124.
TP
T’
￼￼VPasp V’
V
na’e (pst)
DP V’ ne
(she)
V puke (sick )
Postverbal pronominal subjects are those raised to Spec, AgrSP. The VP complex containing the Tense marker in the higher shell and the verbal root in the lower VP shell raises to TP, as in SLQZ:
￼￼￼T
AgrSP AgrS’
AgrSP AgrOP AgrO’
￼￼￼VPstem
￼￼￼￼￼￼
￼125.
3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 95
AgrS AgrOP AgrO’
￼￼VPasp V’
TP
T’
T
￼￼￼￼￼V VPstem na’e
(pst)
ti
AgrSP
DP ￼ ￼ AgrS’ nei
￼￼￼(she) V’
￼￼￼￼V puke (sick )
This structure may account for the different morphological forms of cli- ticized and non-cliticized pronouns: one possibility is that the case markers on full, postverbal pronominal subjects are determiners whose features need to be checked by movement to Agr, thus forcing their extraction from VP.
Additional support for VP-raising comes from the distribution of defi- nite and indefinite objects in Tongan. Definite objects in Tongan follow lexical subjects:
126. Na’e kai ‘e Sione e maá past eat def John def bread “John ate the bread” (Shumway 1988, p. 188)
Tongan has a number of verbal constructions, however, in which the verb and indefinite object together are treated as a single lexical unit. One such expression is kai maá “eat bread”. When an indefinite object is used in such a construction, it precedes, rather than follows, a lexical subject:
127. Na’e kai maá ‘e Sione past eat bread def John “John ate bread” (Shumway 1988, p. 188)
In this example, the indefinite object appears to have undergone movement along with the verb to pre-subject position. Assuming Kayne’s requirement that heads only adjoin to the left of other heads, the object could not have joined to the verb via incorporation.
The contrast in word order between (126) and (127) can be easily accounted for under a VP-raising analysis. When objects are definite,
96 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
they raise out of VP to AgrO. The VP (containing the tense morpheme and traces of the raised object and subject) raises to spec, TP:
￼128.
TP
T’
￼￼VPasp V’
T
AgrSP
DP AgrS’ ‘e Sionei
(John) AgrS AgrOP
DP AgrO’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼V
na’e (pst)
ti
VP
caus V’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼V Kai (eat)
V tv
VPstem V’
e maá (the bread)
j
￼￼TP
tj
￼When objects are indefinite, they remain inside VP. The subject raises out to spec, AgrSP, and the VP raises to spec, TP:
129.
VPasp V’
￼￼T’
T ￼ ￼ AgrSP
￼￼￼￼￼V na’e (pst)
VP DP AgrS’
￼￼￼caus V’
V Kai (eat)
maá (bread)
V tv
￼￼ti
‘e Sionei (John) AgrS
VPstem V’
AgrOP AgrO’
￼￼￼￼￼￼The placement of indefinite objects inside VP is also consistent with Diesing’s (1992) proposal that indefinite arguments take scope inside VP, while definite arguments raise out of VP to receive definite interpretations.
3.4 Crosslinguistic Correlations 97
Furthermore, head-movement accounts of the cliticization process fail to produce all and only the allowable constructions. I will now consider the possible verbal head-raising scenarios that could potentially generate the allowable word orders.
In all of these scenarios, I assume that the tense marker is generated in the head of T. Subjects are generated VP-internally. Thus, a possible underlying structure for (116) would be as follows:
130.
TP
T’
T
na’e (past)
￼￼￼￼AgrSP
AgrS’
￼￼￼AgrS
AgrOP AgrO’
AgrO
DP V’
ne V (she) puke
(sick )
￼￼￼VP
￼￼￼￼In order for the tense marker to precede the verb at spell-out, it must be assumed that the verb does not raise to and incorporate into T until LF. Thus, Tense features in Tongan are weak: they do not require the verb that receives these features to move in the overt syntax.
If this is the case, then the cliticized subject constructions can be easily derived: the verb remains in situ at spell-out, and the subject pronoun raises to spec, AgrSP or remains in situ itself in spec, VP.
This raises the question, however, of how to derive sentences with lexi- cal subjects, which appear postverbally:
131. Na’e kai e Sione e maá past eat def John def bread “John ate the bread” (Shumway 1988, p. 188)
Here, it must be assumed that the verb raises to a position above the subject, but below the tense marker in TP. One possibility is that it under- goes “partial movement” to the head of AgrSP, leaving the subject stranded in spec VP. Such movement, however, seems unmotivated: why
’
98 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
would the verb be required to raise in these cases? Since Tongan verbs ap- pear without overt person/number inflection, it appears that these features are weak, and thus do not need to be checked by overt movement. Also, if it is possible for such normally weak features to be satisfied early by overt movement (in clear violation of Last Resort) what blocks the verb from undergoing further movement to TP at spell-out?
The above data show that for Tongan and Samoan, VP-remnant move- ment accounts for possible word order alternations, while head-movement of the verb fails to do so.
Berber Second-Position Object Clitics
Further evidence for the phrasal status of verbs in VSO languages comes from the distribution of second-position object clitics in Berber, an Afroasiatic language. As with the SLQZ second-position adverbial clitics discussed in Section 1.1, the Berber clitics may cliticize both to verbs and clearly phrasal constituents. Lee and Ouhalla (1998) note that a unified account for the second-position clitic construction is only possible if verbs are assumed to undergo the same type of movement as the other XPs. Ob- ject and directionality clitics in Berber appear in the second position in a sentence, after wh-words, focused XPs, clausal negation, or clause-initial verbs:9
132. (*CL) V (CL)
wh-XP (CL) V (*CL)
foc-XP (CL) V (*CL) neg (CL) V (*CL)
133. Min as y-usha ufrux? what to-her 3MS-gave boy “What did the boy give her?”
134. Tafirast ay as y-usha ufrux
pear FM to-her 3MS-gave boy “It’s the pear that the boy gave her”
135. Ur as y-usha ufrux tafirast
neg to-her 3MS-gave boy pear “The boy didn’t give her the pear”
136. Y-ush as ufrux tafirast 3MS-gave to-her boy pear “The boy gave her the pear”
9 These clitics, however, may not directly follow left-dislocated subjects, which are interpreted as topics.
￼￼
3.5 Conclusion 99
If it is indeed the case that these examples all exemplify the same con- struction, the fact that verbs may precede object/directionality clitics appears problematic. Apart from the verbal cases such as (136), the other constituents that trigger clitic-second form a natural class: wh-words, fo- cused constituents, and clausal negation can be analyzed as XPs containing operators. These constituents are assumed to occupy high (pre-AgrSP/TP) positions in the tree.
If pre-clitic verbs in constructions such as (136) are assumed to be heads, then it must also be assumed that clitic-second in these cases is a derived differently than in the other cases. Ideally, however, any account of pre-clitic verbs must be consistent with other contexts in which second- position clitics are allowed.
Thus, the only solution that allows all clitic-second constructions in Berber to be treated as uniform derivations is to assume that clause-initial verbs in clitic constructions such as (136) are remnant VPs in the spec of CP/FocP. (In the presence of other constituents in CP/FocP, VP remains in TP.) This allows the clitic to be analysed as occupying the same position in all contexts, and allows verb-initial clitic constructions to be structurally unified with XP-initial clitic constructions.
3.5 Conclusion
In this chapter, I showed both morphological and syntactic evidence that verbs in SLQZ should be construed as remnant VPs, rather than verbal heads. This evidence included the ordering of verbal morphemes, and the phrase-like behavior of verbs in certain syntactic constructions. I showed that while there is no principled way to derive the morphological ordering of SLQZ verbs via head movement, a remnant VP-raising strategy can account for both the morpheme ordering and syntactic distribution of SLQZ verbs in a principled way.
I also showed crosslinguistic evidence that VP-remnant raising accounts for VSO word order in a number of unrelated languages, as well as some of the typological features often associated with verb-initial languages (such as preverbal tense/aspect markers and predicates with phrase-like syntax).
￼
100 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
3.6 Appendix to Chapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs
3.6.1 The Phrasal Head-Movement Proposal: Carnie 1995
An alternate approach to the problem of syntactically interchangeable verbs and phrasal categories is proposed by Carnie (1995). He notes cases in Modern Irish (also a VSO language) in which nominal and adjectival predicates, which can contain entire phrasal categories and should thus be assumed to be XPs, undergo what appears to be head-movement. He pro- poses (following Chomsky 1995) that the X/XP distinction is an archaic artifact of X’ theory and that it is possible, in effect, for phrasal categories to be treated as heads and thus undergo head movement. (Stowell 1981 likewise suggests the possibility of phrasal constituents incorporating into verbal heads.) Carnie also shows evidence from other languages suggest- ing that large constituents crosslinguistically may also undergo similar processes. He gives several examples from a range of languages (including Persian, Yoruba, and Yiddish) in which large, apparently phrasal constitu- ents undergo movement considered to be limited to heads or take affixes normally subcategorized by heads.
One piece of evidence that Carnie presents for analyzing complex predi- cates as heads comes from wh-extraction constraints in Irish. No material may be extracted from inside a non-referential predicate nominal (such as (137)) by wh-movement (138):
137. Is [np ambráni [cp aL bhuailfidh an píobaire ti]
c song COMP play.fut the piper “Yellow Submarine” is a song which the bagpiper
(é) “Yellow Submarine” agr
is going to play”
(Carnie 1995, p. 194)
138. *Cén píobairej arb [np ambráni [cp aL bhuailfeadh séj ti] which piper rel song COMP play.cond he “Which bagpiper is “Yellow Submarine” a song which
(é) “Yellow Submarine” agr
he/ti is going to play?” (Carnie 1995, p. 194)
￼
3.6 Appendix to Chapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs 101
Carnie argues that the nominal status of the predicate should not be con- sided the cause of the ban on extraction, since wh-extraction may occur out of other nominal phrases in Irish:
139. Tá máthair an fhir san otherlann
be.pres mother the man.gen in.the hospital “The man's mother is in the hospital” (Carnie 1995, p. 193)
140. Cé aN bhuil ai máthair san otherlann
who COMP be.pres. his mother in.the hospital
“Who is (his) mother in the hospital?” (Carnie 1995, p. 193)
Thus, Carnie argues, the only explanation for the ban on extraction out of the complex nominal predicate in (138) is that has been reanalyzed as a word (head), and thus can no longer be broken up by extraction.
3.6.2 Against Complex Head-Movement
Carnie’s data and analysis are provocative. Like SLQZ, Irish has a number of constructions in which non-head constituents and heads can undergo identical syntactic processes. Carnie proposes that rather than positing putative “heads” as XPs, the constituents that appear to be XPs should be treated as heads. This raises an obvious question: can this strategy work for SLQZ as well?
A strictly theory-internal reason against complex head-movement is that it raises problems for Kayne,s antisymmetry constraints. If a large non- head dominating a number of terminals itself (such as a complex nominal predicate) raised into a head, a structure such as the following would re sult:
￼
102 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
141.
QP X’
X WP
In this structure, XP would be the complex predicate that “head- moves” into the head of Z (the exact nature of these categories being irrele- vant here). This results in a non-head (XP) being adjoined to a head (Z), which, as seen earlier, forms an illicit structure. The complement of XP, WP, linearly precedes YP, but cannot c-command it (by Kayne,s defini- tion) because it is dominated by XP and YP is not. The structure is thus not fully antisymmetric, and thus illicit.
Furthermore, there may be independent reasons why the Irish contrasts in (1-4) occur. Consider again the data in (1-4): these examples intend to show that while Irish allows wh-extraction from complex nominals, it does not allow wh-extraction from nominal predicates. Carnie proposes that the island status of complex predicate nominals stems from their status as syn- tactic heads.
A possible explanation for this constraint could be the position in which nominal predicates appear. In SLQZ and a number of other languages (such as Hausa), nominal and adjectival predicates occupy the same slot as focused constituents (in SLQZ, the immediately preverbal position, as seen in (142)). This position, when filled (143), blocks wh-movement:
142. Mee’s n-àa Gye’eihlly teacher neut-be Mike
“Mike is a teacher”
143. *Tu mee’s n-àa? who teacher neut-be “Who is a teacher?”
In order for wh-movement past a predicate nominal to occur in SLQZ, the predicate nominal must appear in postverbal position rather than in its normal preverbal position:
￼ZP
Z’
Z YP
XP Z Y’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Y
￼￼
3.6 Appendix to Chapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs 103
144. Tu n-àa mee’s?
who neut-be teacher
“Who is a teacher?”
This suggests that preverbal nominal predicates in SLQZ either occupy the same position as wh-words or a position that blocks wh-movement for independent reasons. (A more detailed account of the interaction between wh-movement and focus is presented in Chapters 4 and 5.)
If predicate nominals occupy a similar position in Irish, then the ban on extraction out of complex predicates could be the result of the actual posi- tion of the predicate itself, not its lack of internal structure.
Another possibility is that different types of nominal expressions in Irish simply have different constraints on extraction. In English, for instance, wh-extraction out of relative clauses is clearly disallowed (145), while wh- extraction out of possessive constructions is allowed in certain registers, as noted by Kayne 1993 (146):
145. *Who do you think the man that hit t sued?
146. Who do you think t ,s mother is in the hospital?
It is plausible that similar constraints may hold in Irish. ,
There are also language-specific reasons against extending Carnie s analysis to SLQZ, and thus treating all SLQZ predicates as heads. While both Irish and SLQZ have syntactic constructions in which phrases and heads apparently appear interchangeably, these constructions differ across the two languages. In Irish, the problem cases appear to be limited to those in which phrasal categories (complex nominal predicates) appear in posi- tions normally associated with heads: specifically, these predicates may appear in positions normally reserved for verbal heads. In SLQZ, problem- atic cases include those in which apparent heads (verbs) appear in positions normally associated with XPs (such as the constituent negation construction and adverbial clitic constructions described in Section 3.2.1). If we assume that verbs in SLQZ are indeed heads, and that heads thus may undergo the same type of constituent negation as nominals and preposi- tional phrases, then we would have to assume that nominal arguments and PPs are likewise treated as heads in the syntax.
3.6.3 XP-Raising Analyses for Irish
I have made a number of arguments why complex predicates should not be treated as heads in SLQZ. But is it still a workable option for languages such as Irish?
Other recent work on Irish supports the possibility of the VP-raising analysis argued for here. Other researchers have independently proposed
￼
104 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
XP-raising analyses of Irish (Duffield 1993, 1995; Noonan 1999). Duffield notes that the possibility of apparently “right adjoined” adverbial phrases and light pronouns is highly inconsistent with the otherwise completely head-initial syntax of Irish, and proposes that adverbials phrases and pro- nouns end up at the right edge of sentences because they are generated high (adjoined to TP) and the remainder of the sentence (the TP containing the verb, subject, and object) raises past it. Thus, sentence-final adverbs in Irish sentences such as that in (147) result from the movement process in (148):
147. Chonaic Máire an fear sa tsráid i nDoire inné saw Mary the man in-the street in Derry yesterday
“ Mary saw the man in the street in Derry yesterday ” (Duffield 1994: p. 221)
148.
WP
TP W’
Chonaic Máire... saw Mary...
Noonan,s (1999) analysis of the Irish particles aL and aN also points to a VP-raising analysis. AL, which appears between fronted wh-words and verbs when subjects or objects are wh-moved, and aN, which appears be- tween verbs and fronted PPs or adverb phrases, have been previously ana- lysed as “agreeing complementizers”(McCloskey 1979, cited in Noonan 1999). Their presence was argued to be direct evidence for successive cy- clic wh-movement:
149. Cén páistí a chreideann Seán a d'imheodh ___anseo? which children aL believes Sean aL play-COND here
“Which children does Sean believe would play here?”
150. Céard leis a ndearna tú é? what with-3s aN did you it
“ With what did you do it? ”
￼￼￼￼￼￼W TP AdvP t
inné yesterday
￼￼￼
3.6 Appendix to Chapter 3: Considering Head Movement of XPs 105
The particle aL also appears before fronted objects in infinitival clauses:
151. Ba mhaith liom [Seán an caora a mheá ar an bhfeirm] I would like Sean the sheep aL weigh on the farm “I would like Sean to weigh the sheep on the farm”
In this context, aL has been analysed as a reflex of specifier-head agreement between the object DP and verb (Duffield 1995, Noonan 1994, cited in Noonan 1999).
When a PP or adverbial phrase raises through more than one clause, however, aN appears only in the lowest clause. The particle aL appears in front of all higher clauses the wh-adjunct raises through:
152. Cé shíleann Máire a chreideann Seán ar labhair Nic leis who (aL) think M. aL believes Sean aN spoke Nic with-agr
“Who does Mary think that John believes that Nic spoke with?”
Noonan points out that the appearance of both aL and aN in these cases cannot be accounted for by the argument that aL represents agreement with wh-moved arguments, while aN agrees with wh-moved adjuncts: if this were the case, then aN should appear in every clause the adjunct wh- expression raises through.
She argues instead that aL in multiclausal wh-questions is not a reflex of successive-cyclic wh-movement, but of VP/CP fronting. When a wh word raises out of an embedded CP, the CP itself raises to the front of the next CP up. This movement is exemplified in the derivation for the following example:
153. Céard a chreideann Seán [pro a dhéanfá__]? what aL believes Sean pro aL would-say-2s “What does Sean believe you would say?”
The base-generated structure appears as follows:
154. [chreideann Seán [pro dhéanfá céard]] believes Sean pro would-say what
Wh-movement of the object triggers the appearance of aL in the lower clause:
155. [chreideann Seán [céard pro a dhéanfá t]] believes Sean what pro aL would-say
The embedded CP itself fronts to the left of the matrix clause, thus trig- gering the appearance of aL before the matrix verb:
￼
106 3 The Syntax of Verb Raising in SLQZ: Arguments for VP Raising
156. [céard pro a dhéanfá t] [ a chreideann Seán tCP] what pro aL would-say aL believes Sean
The matrix remnant VP then fronts itself:
157. [ a chreideann Seán tCP] [céard pro a dhéanfá t] aL believes Sean what pro aL would-say
Finally, the wh-word raises to the leftmost spec, CP:
158. Céard [ a chreideann Seán tCP] [twh pro a dhéanfá twh] what aL believes Sean pro aL would-say
Thus, the functions of aL in wh-constructions and in object-fronting constructions can be unified: in both cases, aL represents agreement trig- gered by fronting of a complement, either clausal or nominal. This also ac- counts for the distribution of aL and aN in embedded adjunct wh- questions: since aL reflects only fronting of arguments and clausal com- plements, wh- extraction of non-arguments does not trigger the appearance of aL in the clause from which extraction takes place.
If Duffield's and Noonan's accounts are correct, then the ability of ver- bal and phrasal predicates to appear interchangeably in certain Irish con- structions is amenable to the same solution as that proposed for SLQZ: the verbal form that undergoes movement is a VP remnant rather than a verbal head, and verbal movement is XP movement.
￼
4 Further ConsequencesofVP-Remnant Movement: Some Common Negation Structures in SLQZ
4.1 Overview of Three Basic SLQZ Negation Constructions
SLQZ has a rich inventory of negative constructions. In the previous chapter, some of these were used as evidence for remnant movement of VP, rather than head-movement of V, in SLQZ grammar. This chapter will provide explicit syntactic accounts for three of the most common negation structures in SLQZ: clausal negation with the negative marker cë’ity (1), focus/constituent negation with the negative marker a’ti’ (2), and indefi- nite/existential negation with the negative marker tèe’bag (3):
Clausal Negation:
1. Cë’ity ny-àa’z-dya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb
neg subj-beat-dya’ Mike Felipe “Mike didn’t hit Felipe”
Constituent Negation:
2. A’ti’ Sann Luu’c-dya’ gw-eh Pa’amm
neg San Lucas-dya’ perf-go Pam
Pam didn’t go to SAN LUCAS (but rather somewhere else)”
Indefinite/Existential Negation:
3. Tèe’bag calìi ch-o’o-dy-ënn izhih
no where irr-go-dya’-1p tomorrow “We won’t go anywhere tomorrow”
This chapter will show how VP-raising provides semantic, as well as syntactic, motivation for some of the structures discussed. Examination of these negative constructions will also afford an opportunity to refine and elaborate upon the tentative hierarchy of functional projections posited in the last chapter, and will provide evidence for some antisymmetry-driven constraints on movement.
￼￼￼￼￼￼
108 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
At first glance, these three negative constructions look quite similar, as can be seen in the preceding examples. In all cases, negation is clause- initial, and negated constituents appear between two markers indicating negation. On closer examination, however, these patterns prove to differ syntactically in interesting ways. These differences reveal much about the inventory of functional projections and their order in SLQZ.
I will begin my discussion of negation with a brief account of the syn- tactic and semantic features of the clitic -dya’, which appears after negated constituents in all three of the negation constructions under discussion. I will then examine and propose analyses for clausal negation, constituent negation, and finally, existential negation.
4.2 What Does -dya’ Do?
In all three of the negative constructions shown above, negated constitu- ents are followed by the clitic -dya’ (or its variant, -di’). Because its semantic features are complex and not limited to negation, I will leave it unglossed.
Dya’, which appears (nearly) obligatorily in all three negative construc- tions, also appears in other, non-negative constructions. It may appear as a clitic on focus-fronted constituents to mark them as occupying a low point on some contextually determined scale:
4. X:-bu’uhdy-dya’ Li’eb w-laàa’n Gye’eihlly poss-chicken-dya’ Felipe perf-steal Mike
“All Mike stole was Felipe’s chicken
(and not anything better)”
￼5. Nnyi’ihs-dya’ b-dèèi’dy Gye’eihlly gw-èe’eh
water-dya’ perf-give Mike perf-drink Felipe
“All Mike gave Felipe to drink was water (even though there was lots of other stuff)”
It also appears on clause-initial constituents to mark degree or extent (P. Munro, p.c.):
6. Terseer-di’ gu-allda-a’ third-dya’ perf-arr-1s
“I went as far as third grade” (ML 1997)
7. Cali-dya’ r-uhny Li’eb zèèi’ny? where-dya hab-do Felipe work “How far away does Felipe work?”
Li’eb
￼
4.2 What Does -dya’ Do? 109 It may also appear on non-negated verbs. In these contexts, it appears to
highlight points in time to indicate suddenness of an event:
8. Ca-yìi’ah-dya’ Gye’eihlly nnahx chih b-iahb prog-drink-dya’ Mike chocolate when perf-fall “Mike was drinking chocolate when
ba’gêëizh loh-ih fly in-3s.dist a fly fell into it”
9. Cay-auw-dya’ Gye’eihlly gueht perf-eat-dya’ Mike tortilla
“Mike was eating (tortillas)
chih b-cuhni’ih Li’eb zh:àa’n-ih when perf-kick Felipe rear-3s.dist when Felipe kicked his butt”
Thus, while -dya’ appears to contribute little meaning of its own when under the scope of negation, it does make a semantic contribution when it appears outside the scope of negation.
-Dya’ appears to be semantically and syntactically reminiscent of Eng- lish any: like -dya’, any may appear both under the scope of negation (where it has traditionally been called “negative polarity any” and in non- negative contexts (the so-called “free-choice” use of any). The differing uses and interpretations of any in these contexts show some parallels to those of negative and non-negative -dya’ in SLQZ.
Under the scope of negation, any contributes no truth-functional value to expressions in which it appears:
10. Mike didn’t eat (any) grasshoppers
It can, however, add a slightly more emphatic feel to the sentence: in the preceding example, it could potentially express the idea that it was not only the case that Mike failed to eat grasshoppers, he was unwilling to eat them or consider eating them.
SLQZ -dya’ makes no such contributions to the semantics of negative sentences. In SLQZ, there are contexts (which will be accounted for in the sections to follow) in which -dya’ may be omitted in negative construc- tions. Such constructions suggest that -dya’ under negation, like negative- polarity any, contributes little semantically to the structures in which it appears. Compare (11), without -dya’, to (12), a standard clausal negation structure with -dya’:
11. Gye’eihlly cë’ity n-àa me’s Mike neg neut-be teacher
“MIKE is not a teacher”
￼
110 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
12. Cë’ity n-àa -dya’ Gye’eihlly me’s neg neut-be-dya’ Mike teacher “Mike is not a teacher”
The absence of dya’ in (11) is syntactically motivated by movement constraints triggered by focus-fronting of the subject Gye’eihlly, “Mike”; this and other constraints on the distribution of -dya’ will be discussed in detail in Section 4.3.2.
Outside the scope of negation, however, any receives possible readings similar to some of those available to non-negative-dya’: As argued by Kadmon and Landman (1990), any serves to denote an (extreme) point on a contextually fixed scale:
13. Any match that you strike will light
14. Anyone can finish this puzzle in five minutes
In (13), use of any match suggests that even defective or unusual matches might work in the context introduced by the sentence; in (14), use of anyone implies that even those normally assumed to be unable to finish puzzles (such as unusually slow people or small children) would be able to complete the puzzle under discussion. In short, Kadmon and Landman ar- gue, any, in both negative-polarity and non-negative contexts, serves to expand the range of contextually acceptable objects that can be introduced into the discourse. This would account for the interpretation of any in both non-negative contexts such as (13-14) and the emphatic negative flavor of any under negation in examples such as (10). The interpretation of non-negative any in English appears quite similar to the contribution made by -dya’ in non-negative contexts such as (4-5).
While negative-polarity any can add emphatic readings to contexts in which it appears, -dya’ under the scope of negation, as previously noted, does not. The lack of any semantic contribution by -dya’ to negative expressions, along with fact that -dya’ is obligatory in most negative contexts, suggests that it has been reanalyzed from an optional negative polarity item expressing emphatic negation (like negative polarity any) to an obligatory function word necessary for the syntactic realization of nega- tive structures. I will thus argue that while it seems probable that -dya’ in SLQZ may have been derived from an indefinite quantifier much like Eng- lish any, its quantificational force has been bleached in negative contexts. In the following sections, I will discuss how this is realized in the syntax.
￼
4.3 Clausal Negation
Clausal negation in SLQZ is expressed with two morphemes: cë’ity, which precedes the verb, and -dya’, which immediately follows the verb and precedes the subject:
15. Cë’ity ny-àa’z-dya’ Gye’eihlly Li’eb neg subj-beat-dya’ Mike Felipe “Mike didn’t hit Felipe”
Two-part negation structures are common crosslinguistically, and have been generally assumed to result from spec-head agreement of negative morphemes in NegP. Thus, there are two possible structures for SLQZ clausal negation: either the preverbal negative morpheme cë’ity is the head of NegP and the postverbal clitic -dya’ is the specifier (as has been suggested for the preverbal negative morpheme ne and postverbal nega- tive morpheme pas in French clausal negation (Moritz and Valois 1992), or preverbal cë’ity is the specifier of NegP and postverbal -dya’ the head (as suggested for the preverbal and postverbal negative particles in the Grassfields Bantu language Nweh by Nkemnji 1995).
4.3.1 Reasons Why cë’ity Is a Specifier, -dya’ a Head: Evidence from -zhya’ Cliticization
There is reason to believe that in SLQZ, the preverbal negative marker cë’ity is in the specifier of NegP, while -dya’ is the head, parallel to the ac- count proposed for Nweh by Nkemnji 1995.
This evidence comes from the distribution of the modal clitic-zhya’ in clausal negation structures. Recall from the previous chapter that -zhya’ cliticization was used as a diagnostic for XP status. The fact that -zhya’ may cliticize to verbs, as well as to DPs and PPs, was argued to be a diagnostic for the XP status of SLQZ verbs:
16.
17.
18.
N-u’-zhya’-rëng Lohs Aa’nngl neut-exist-might-3p.prox Los Angeles
“They might be in Los Angeles”
Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’-rëng
Los Angeles-might neut-exist-3p.prox
“Los Angeles might be where they are (not somewhere else)”
Laa’iny yu’uh-zhya’ n-u’uh li’ebr in house-might neut-exist book “The book might be in the house”
4.3 Clausal Negation 111
￼￼￼￼￼￼
112 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
Thus, I will continue to assume that the ability of a constituent to participate in -zhya’-cliticization indicates its XP status.
In clausal negation structures, -zhya’ can cliticize to cë’ity . This sug- gests that cë’ity is an XP as well. Compare a simple example of clausal negation (19), a non-negated sentence where -zhya’ cliticizes onto the verb (20), and a clausal negation structure with -zhya’ (21):
19. Cë’ity n-gya’a-dya’ Gye’eihlly neg subj-dance-dya’ Mike “Mike didn’t dance”
20. B-gya’a’-zhya’ Gye’eihlly perf-dance-might Mike “Mike might have danced”1
21. Cë’ity-zhya’ n-gya’a-dya’ Gye’eihlly neg-might subj-dance-dya’ Mike “Mike might not have danced”
The modal clitic -zhya’ cannot cliticize to -dya’ in clausal negation constructions. This suggests that -dya’ is not an XP:
22. *Cë’ity n-gya’a-dya’-zhya’ Gye’eihlly neg subj-dance-dya’-might Mike “Mike might not have danced”
By extension, this suggests that the cë’ity-verb-dya’ complex does not form a movable XP constituent, even if cë’ity and -dya’ are required to appear in spec-head agreement with each other at some point in the deriva- tion. Independent evidence for this will be shown in the following sections.
Under the assumption that verbs in SLQZ are actually VP remnants rather than heads, and negation is realized by movement into NegP, ne- gated verbs must raise into NegP via XP-movement. Thus, they raise into the specifier of NegP. Under the assumption that two-part negation results from spec-head agreement, this would place -dya’ in the head of NegP.
I will assume that cë’ity is base-generated in a quantifier phrase that takes scope over VP. The QP containing the VP raises into Spec, NegP thus falling into specifier-head agreement with -dya’, as seen in (23)2:
1 As described in Chapter 1, the Subjunctive aspect rarely appears in non-negated matrix clauses, but is used in place of Perfective aspect in negated sentences.
2 This structure raises the issue of how -zhya’ cliticization with cë’ity can take
place, since here cë’ity takes a verbal complement. I will assume that it is pos- sible for the VP complement to raise independently of cë’ity in some contexts, leaving the QP and the trace of VP to raise and cliticize to -zhya’.
￼￼
NegP
4.3 Clausal Negation 113
￼23.
QP Neg’
￼￼￼￼Q’
Q VP cë’ity
Neg ... dya’
￼￼(neg)
(danced)
ny-àa’z
I will thus assume this to be the basic structure for clausal negation. I will discuss in detail the exact position of NegP in relation to other func- tional projections in the remainder of this chapter.
4.3.2 Doubly-Filled Comp Effects: More Evidence for the Structure of Clausal Negation
There is evidence that the cë’ity-verb complex undergoes additional movement after raising into spec, NegP. This movement would be consis- tent with the fact that cë’ity, the verb, and -dya’ together are not treated as a single constituent, as exemplified by the inability of the modal clitic -zhya’ to follow -dya’.
This evidence for movement comes from the fact that -dya’ is usually omitted in the presence of constituents to the left of cë’ity: Such contexts include wh-questions, relative clauses, and negated sentences with focus- fronted arguments:
24. Tu cë’ity r-yu’làa’z-u’? who neg hab-like-2s.inf “Who don’t you like?”
25. Me’s [nih cë’ity y-zhyàag Beed yzh:ii] n-u’uh rèe’ teacher [that neg irr-meet Pedro tomorrow] neut-exist here “The teacher that Pedro won’t meet tomorrow is here”
26. Gye’eihlly cë’ity n-àa me’s
Mike neg neut-be teacher “MIKE is not a teacher”
Another context in which -dya’ is omitted is in the presence of the sen- tence-final yes/no question marker èee. I will argue later in this section that this case can be accounted for identically with those above:
114 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
27. Cë’ity r-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly bx:àady èee? neg hab-like Mike grasshopper Q “Doesn’t Mike like grasshoppers?”
Thus, the presence of overt material above NegP blocks the presence of -dya’.
This suggests that an empty projection above NegP is needed if both cë’ity and -dya’ are to appear. This requirement can be accounted for by Koopman’s (1996) Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter (GDCF), which rules that no projection may have both its head and specifier filled simultaneously. Apparent cases of specifier-head agreeement result from string-vacuous movement of specifiers into higher, empty projections.
Thus, the cëi’ty+verb complex actually raises to a higher position after passing through spec, NegP:
￼28.
cëi’ty+verb
CP
￼￼QPi
C’
ti
￼￼￼C
NegP
Neg -dya’
￼￼NegP
Neg -dya’
Neg
Neg’
￼This movement, however, is blocked when the head or the specifier of the CP projection directly above NegP is overtly filled (by either a wh-word or a relative marker).3
29.
￼wh
CP
C
C’
QP
￼￼￼￼￼3 I assume, following Rizzi 1997, that CP actually consists of multiple functional projections, some of which may not be active or available in certain construc- tions. Evidence for multiple CP projections is given later in this chapter and in chapter 5.
4.3 Clausal Negation 115
In these contexts, then, the QP containing cë’ity has no place to raise to after passing through the specifier of NegP. The structure is thus ill- formed, since it violates the GDCF. For the cë’ity-verb complex to stay in NegP, then, material in the head of NegP (-dya’) must be suppressed. If - dya’ is not present, no linear or structural relation need be established be- tween the complements of cë’ity: and -dya’ in the head of NegP, and the structure is thus licit. (Covert material, such as negative features that need to be licensed by movement through the specifier of NegP, however, may still be present.)
The absence of -dya’ in negated yes/no questions can be explained in similar terms, despite the fact that the question marker surfaces clause- finally: the yes/no question marker èee, like wh-words and relative mark- ers, is generated above NegP in C, and the remainder of the sentence raises past èee to the specifier of CP (and then, assuming the Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter, on to some higher projection):
￼30.
Cë’ity r-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly bx:àady èee? neg hab-like Mike grasshopper Q “Doesn’t Mike like grasshoppers?”
CP
C’
C èee
(Q)
￼￼￼NegP QP
cë’ityVP Neg ... -dya’
￼￼Neg’
￼￼Because the question marker èee occupies C, and the remainder of the sentence raises to spec, CP, the raising of QP into CP is blocked. Since QP must remain in NegP, the Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter thus forces the suppression of -dya’, as in the wh-question and relative clause cases.
If this analysis of -dya’ dropping is correct, it further supports the idea that negated verbs are VPs, rather than heads: if Koopman is correct and either specifiers or heads of projections may appear, and if
-dya’ is indeed a head, as previously argued, the fact that verbs remain overtly realized even when -dya’ is suppressed suggests that verbs cannot be heads that incorporate into -dya’.
Furthermore, this supports the idea that cë’ity is the specifier, rather than head, of NegP: if VPs are indeed specifiers, and are always overtly realized in clausal negation, this suggests that the negative marker that ap- pears with them also surfaces in Spec, NegP. If -dya’ were the specifier of NegP, the requirement that -dya’ be omitted in certain contexts should also apply to verbs, under the assumption that the GDCF is responsible for the
116 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
absence of -dya’. The fact that it does not suggests that -dya’ and the QP containing VP appear in different positions. Since it is now clear the VP appears in specifier positions, -dya’ must appear in the head of NegP.
Theoretical Consequences of the Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter
This analysis explicitly suggests that structural well-formedness be a con- dition fulfilled at spell-out in SLQZ: movement may occur for strictly structural, rather than feature-checking reasons (as suggested by the addi- tional movement of material from spec, NegP to spec, CP), and deletion of material at PF may likewise be motivated for structural reasons. This is consistent with both Kayne’s and Koopman’s formulations of antisym- metry requirements.
Koopman’s Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter has further conse- quences for grammatical relations in SLQZ. The GDCF is motivated by Koopman’s desire to recognize segments (defined here as branches domi- nated by X’), as well as categories (that is, XPs), as potentially c- commanding entities: she argues that there are cases in which X’s should be recognizable for linear and hierarchical mapping (such as incorporation of one head into another, under the traditional assumption that this in- volves adjunction of a head to an X’). Below, I repeat Kayne’s definition of c-command (Kayne 1994:16):
31. X c-commands Y iff X and Y are categories and X excludes Y and every category that dominates X dominates Y
Under Kayne’s restrictions against entering segments into the computa- tion of linear order of constituents, a standard head-incorporation structure such as (32), below, is illicit:
32.
IP
I’
I VP
￼￼￼￼￼￼Vi I gloat -ed
V’
ti
￼￼In this structure, the verb “gloat” has undergone head-movement and adjoined to I, which is headed by the tense marker “-ed”. This structure is ruled out under Kayne’s account because the linear order between the raised verb “gloat” and the inflectional morpheme “-ed” cannot be de- fined under the preceding definition of c-command. Since neither the node dominating “gloat” nor that dominating “-ed” are categories (they are both
4.3 Clausal Negation 117
I’s, thus segments of IP), neither can c-command the other, and thus, nei- ther can be assigned linear precedence over the other.
Structures such as (32), however, are standardly assumed to account for head-incorporation structures such as inflected verbs and compound word formation (Baker 1988, Kural 1996, among others). If such structures are indeed legitimate, Koopman argues, then Kayne’s formulation of anti- symmetry must be modified. Koopman proposes that segments (such as the I’s in (32)) can be computed into c-command relations, so that “gloat”, dominated by the higher I’, asymmetrically c-commands “-ed”, dominated by both the higher and lower I’ segment.
Thus, Koopman assumes the following modifications to Kayne’s c-command requirements:
33. Segments participate in c-command
34. Modified Linear Correspondence Axiom (LCA): the linear order of overt terminal elements corresponds to asymmetric c-command (Koopman 1996, p. 43-44)
Recall from Chapter 2 that Kayne’s LCA determined that the linear or- der of terminal elements corresponds to structural hierarchy, and structural hierarchy is determined by c-command. Kayne, however, defines c- command as only a relation between categories (XPs). Koopman’s modi- fication of Kayne’s LCA differs from the original only in that X’s, as well as full XPs, may determine structural hierarchy and linear order.
Allowing segments to participate in c-command relations, however, forces other structural constraints. If the specifier of IP is filled in struc- tures such as (35), then the computation of linear ordering again becomes problematic:
￼35.
DP
Mike I
IP
I’
￼￼￼￼VP
￼￼Vi I V’
gloat -ed
In this structure, I’ c-commands the specifier of IP (the DP headed by “Mike”). By the modified LCA, the terminal dominated by I’ (“gloated”) should thus precede “Mike”, which is obviously not the case. This struc- ture, then, is illicit under Koopman’s analysis.
Koopman thus proposes the GDCF as a means of getting around this problem. In order to preserve the possibility of segments being used to compute c-command relations, the GDCF rules that either heads or
￼ti
118 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
specifiers can be overtly realized in a projection, but not both. Legitimate configurations are shown below:
36.
￼XP (full)
X’ ...
X’ ...
￼YP X
￼(empty)
37.
YP (empty)
XP
￼￼X (full)
Furthermore, Koopman argues that not only are projections with both overt heads and specifiers blocked, but also projections with both their specifiers and heads empty. This latter restriction is due to visibility re- quirements: a projection must be semantically activated by the presence of lexical material at some point in the derivation. A projection that has not had any overt lexical material pass through it is thus semantically inactive. In short, Koopman’s theory assumes that the semantic features of a pro- jection must be overtly realized within the projection in which they are generated.
Another consequence of the GDCF is that a number of additional pro- jections must be posited to accommodate the apparent co-occurence of specifiers and heads in sentences such as “Mike gloated” : if the structure in (35) is illicit because both the specifier and head of IP are filled, there must be an additional projection available above IP for the subject Mike to raise into. For semantic reasons, this higher projection must be distinct from that which houses question markers and wh-words, for instance.
The GDCF, then, appears to account for the distribution of cë’ity and -dya’ in a consistent way: assuming that cë’ity and -dya’ surface in the specifier and head of NegP, at some point in the derivation, then the con- straint against their cooccurence when higher projections are filled can be simply explained.
4.3.3 Irrealis Negation Effects in Clausal Negation
Another distinctive effect of clausal negation – and one which will be used as a diagnostic for syntactic structure in the remainder of this chapter – is its effect on the interpretation of verbs with Irrealis aspect marking. As de- scribed in the previous chapter, Irrealis-marked verbs are used to express
4.3 Clausal Negation 119
future-tense events (38); under the scope of intensional or modal verbs, they receive subjunctive-like readings (39).
38. Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr irr-sell Mike car “Mike will sell the car”
39. R-càa’z y-too’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr hab-want irr-sell Mike car “Mike wants to sell the car”
Verbs with Irrealis aspect marking may not undergo standard clausal negation in matrix clauses. Instead, they are negated with a distinct nega- tion pattern with cë’ity and -dya’ adjacent to each other, rather than flank- ing the verb. This pattern was discussed in detail in the preceding chapter, and is exemplified again in the following example:
40. Cë’ity-dya’-rëng g-wùall-rëng li’ebr neg-dya-3p.prox irr-read-3p.prox book “They will not read the books”
This structure, in contrast to the standard clausal negation structure, is biclausal: the Irrealis verb “read” remains in TP in a embedded clause, while a covert existential verb in the matrix clause is the actual target of negation by cë’ity. See Section 3.3.2 for a detailed syntactic and semantic analysis of this construction.
Irrealis verbs may, however, appear with the standard clausal negation pattern in embedded clauses. In this case, they receive indirect imperative, rather than simple future, readings, as seen in the preceding chapter. I will call this the Irrealis Negation Effect:
41. R-e’ihpy Lia Pa’amm làa’rëng hab-tell Ms. Pa’amm 3p.prox “Pam told them
cë’ity g-wùall-dya-rëng li’ebr neg irr-read-dya-3p.prox book not to read the books”
≠”Pam told them they will not read the books”
The difference between the readings of the Irrealis verb “read” in (40) and (31) results from a difference in modality. While Irrealis verbs negated by Future Negation get the same simple future reading as matrix clause Irrealis verbs (they describe events that both the speaker and hearer assume will be carried out in the actual word), under normal clausal negation, they receive the same subjunctive-like reading of Irrealis verbs under inten- sional predicates and modals (they describe unrealized events in possible worlds).
￼
120 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
SLQZ modal verbs surface above other verbs in SLQZ. Thus, I assume that MoodP, where the expression of mood is triggered and syntactically licensed, is above TP, as argued in the preceding chapter. The fact that movement of Irrealis verbs under negation results in a modal reading of the verb suggests that verbs that move to NegP must also pass through MoodP:
42.
NegP
cë’ity
g-wùall
(neg will.read)
￼￼￼QP
MoodP
TP
tQP
￼￼￼tQP
￼This activates modal features of the verb when they are present, as is the case with the modal aspects such as the Irrealis, which allow both modal and non-modal readings (Lee 1996). In cases in which the verb is marked with one of the non-modal aspects (which lack mood features) and no other expression of non-indicative modality appears, MoodP is absent or inactive.
To sum up, then, there are three notable semantic features of SLQZ clausal negation: it is based upon specifier-head agreement within NegP, it requires further movement of material in spec, NegP to a higher projection (the GDCF), and it requires movement of verbs through MoodP in order to reach this higher projection (as shown by Irrealis Negation effects). These three features will be used to distinguish the basic clausal negation pattern just described from the superficially similar constituent negation pattern also commonly used in SLQZ.
4.4 Constituent Negation
Another frequently used negation pattern involves the negative morpheme a’ti’, which may be used to negate both verbal and non-verbal constituents. In this section, the distribution of other fronted constituents in a’ti’ nega- tion constructions will be used to determine the inventory and ordering of high (CP) level functional projections in SLQZ.
A’ti’ negation involving verbs or arguments generally results in contras- tively focused negative readings, while a’ti’ negation involving non-verbal predicates does not always force focus readings. A’ti’ negation is superfi- cially similar to clausal negation: a’ti’ precedes, and -dya’ follows, the negated constituent, which may be verbal or non-verbal:
43. A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly neg teacher-dya’ neut-be Mike “Mike is not a teacher”
On closer examination, however, a’ti’ negation differs syntactically from clausal negation. First, there are no doubly-filled comp effects in a’ti’ negation constructions: -dya’ must always be present, even in structures involving wh-movement:
44. Tu a’ti’ me’s (*-dya’) n-àa? who neg teacher (*-dya’) neut-be “Who isn’t a teacher?”
Second, focus-fronted constituents are disallowed in a’ti’ constructions, with or without -dya’:
45. *Gye’eihlly a’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Mike neg teacher-dya’neut-be “MIKE isn’t a teacher”
This is in direct contrast with clausal negation structures, which do allow focus (in the absence of -dya’) as seen in (26).
Fronted constituents, however, are allowed as left-dislocated topics, with the topicalized constituent appearing a second time in the base position:
46. Gye’eihlly a’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly Mike neg teacher -dya’ neut-be Mike “(As for) Mike, he’s not a teacher”
This suggests that focused-fronted and left-dislocated topic arguments occupy different syntactic positions, and that left-dislocated topics land in higher positions than focused constituents. Moreover, QPs headed by a’ti’ raise higher than QPs headed by cëi’ty. Cë’ity surfaces below FocP, thus allowing focused constituents to precede it, but a’ti’ appears either in or above FocP, thus blocking other focused constituents (but still allowing left-dislocated topics, which may surface above FocP):
4.4 Constituent Negation 121
￼
122 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 47.
TopP1
FocP
a’ti’
cë’ity
￼￼￼￼XP
NegP
VP
￼￼￼I will assume that the high position in which left-dislocated topics ap- pear, TopP1, is one of two topic positions used in SLQZ. Evidence for an- other, lower, topic position will be presented later in this chapter. (The presence of topic positions both above and below FocP has been argued for in Italian by Rizzi (1997).)
The higher landing position of a’ti’ also accounts for the fact that it in- variably cooccurs with the negative element -dya’. Since a’ti’ is always forced to raise out of NegP (for reasons to be elaborated in the following sections), the Generalized Doubly-Filled Comp Filter never requires -dya’ (in the head of NegP) to be suppressed.
A third difference between a’ti’ negation and clausal negation is that there are no Irrealis Negation effects with a’ti’. Irrealis verbs under a’ti’ negation don’t get modal readings:
48. A’ti’ y-tòo’oh-dya’ Gye’eihlly ca’rr
neg irr-sell-dya’ Mike car “Mike won’t SELL a car (he’ll buy one)”
Recall from the previous section that the modal readings of Irrealis verbs under clausal negation are triggered by raising of the VP through MoodP on the way to NegP. The lack of modal readings of verbs under a’ti’ negation suggests that either -dya’ and the verb are lower in this context than in clausal negation, or that for some reason the verb is not required to pass through MoodP in a’ti’ negation constructions.
These patterns, however, raise questions about where negation is li- censed in constituent negation constructions: if -dya’ is the head of NegP, and NegP is above MoodP (as argued in the previous section), then the non-modal interpretation of the negated Irrealis verb in (48) is unexplain- able. Likewise, the absence of doubly-filled comp effects in a’ti’ construc- tions suggests that a’ti’ raises higher than cë’ity, -dya’ is generated lower in a’ti’ constructions than in cë’ity constructions, or both.
4.4.1 The Case for NegP2
I will propose that constituent negation is licensed in a lower negative pro- jection distinct from that in which clausal negation is licensed: in brief, SLQZ has two NegPs, a high one above MoodP in which clausal negation is realized (NegP1) and a lower one, below MoodP but above TP, in which constituent and focus negation is realized (NegP2). The placement of NegP2 directly above TP is suggested by the fact that negated non-verbal constituents always appear directly above the verb, which sits in spec, TP, as seen in the following examples:
49. A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly neg teacher dya is Mike “Mike is not a teacher”
50. A’ti’ cuann tenedoor-dya’ b-da’uw Gye’eihlly gueht neg with fork dya’ perf-eat Mike tortilla
“Mike didn’t eat tortillas with a fork”
On the assumption that -dya’ is base-generated as the head of NegP and remains in situ throughout the derivation (as in the clausal negation cases), NegP2 would have to be above TP, but below MoodP.
The existence of two co-existing NegPs was independently proposed for the Romance languages by Zanuttini (1991), who argues that the higher NegP1 takes tensed constituents as its complements, while the lower NegP2 takes (non-tensed) VP as its complement. Thus, in (48),
-dya’ surfaces below NegP1 in the head of NegP2.
The idea that a’ti’ negation is licensed in NegP2, which (following Zanuttini 1991) takes non-tensed complements, is consistent with the fact that a’ti’ negates both non-verbal constituents and contrastively focused verbs. Contrastive negation of verbs differs from clausal negation of verbs in that in the former case, tense takes scope over negation, while in the
latter, negation takes scope over tense.
This contrast can be seen in the following two English examples. In the
first , a standard case of clausal negation, the existence of an entire past event of eating is being negated. In the second case, in which eat is given contrastive focus, it is not the event (including temporal frame) itself being negated, but only the content of the action that took place during this event. In syntactic terms, only the verb, and not the tense features assigned to the verb, is being negated:
51. Mike didn’t eat
“there is no past eating event involving Mike”
52. Mike didn’t EAT (he drank)
“In some past event involving Mike, it was not the case that he ate (he did something else)”
4.4 Constituent Negation 123
￼
124 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
Thus, while in clausal negation, negation takes scope over both tense and the lexical content of the verb, in constituent/focus negation, negation is under the semantic scope of tense, but over the negated constituent it- self.
Thus, the relative placement of the two negative projections is as fol- lows:
53.
NegP1
MoodP NegP2
TP
AgrSP
AgrOP
I assume that when NegP1 is active, NegP2 is absent, and vice versa. This is consistent with the requirements of the GDFC, which states that projections can only be active if either their heads or specifiers (but not both) contain overt material at some point in the derivation. An inactive projection that doesn’t attract any other constituent, then, would be illicit.
4.4.2 Proposed Structure
In this section, I will describe the proposed structures for a’ti’ negation of both verbal and non-verbal constituents. While essentially parallel, the slight differences between these structures provide revealing diagnostics for the existence of additional preverbal projections in SLQZ, as well as diagnostics for more general conditions on movement in SLQZ.
I assume that a’ti’ negation of both verbal and non-verbal constituents originates from the same basic structure: a’ti’ is generated in a QP taking the negated constituent as its complement, parallel to the relation between the clausal negation marker cë’ity and negated verbs. I will consider first the case of contrastively focused verbs under a’ti’, such as that in (48):
54.
Q a’ti’ neg
￼￼￼￼￼￼QP
Q’
￼￼￼VP
ytòo’oh will sell
￼
4.4 Constituent Negation 125
From here, the QP headed by a’ti’ raises to TP to check the tense fea- tures on the VP remnant:
￼55.
QP
TP
T’
￼￼￼￼￼a’ti’ ytòo’oh T neg will.sell
AspP
Asp’ Asp ...
￼￼-dya’ is generated as the head of NegP2 in a’ti’ negation. The a’ti’-verb complex raises to spec, NegP2:
56.
a’ti’ ytòo’oh negwill.sell
NegP2
￼￼QP
Neg’
TP
tQP
￼￼￼Neg dya’
￼This configuration checks the negative features on a’ti’via spec-head agreement with -dya’. However, it violates the GDCF since both the head and specifier of NegP2 are filled simultaneously. The QP headed by a’ti’ needs to raise out of NegP2 into a higher projection, and thus raises to FocP. This both contributes to the (usual) focused reading of the negated expression, and accounts for the fact that focused constituents can’t appear with a’ti’.
There is evidence for the existence of the additional projections marked as XP and YP in the tree above, between TP and FocP. Evidence for these projections will be presented in the following sections.
126 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 57.
FocP
QP a’ti’ytòo’oh
￼￼￼Foc’
Foc XP
X’
X YP
Y
Y’ MoodP
Mood’ Mood NegP2
Neg’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Neg -dya’
TP
T’
T...
￼￼tQP
￼The preceding derivation, however, raises the question of how it is pos- sible for the QP to raise to FocP while bypassing MoodP: since a’ti’ nega- tion does not trigger Irrealis Negation effects, I had argued previously that verbs negated by a’ti’ do not pass through MoodP. The difference between focus negation with a’ti’ and clausal negation with cë’ity, which does trigger Irrealis Negation effects, can be explained in terms of Relativ- ized Minimality.
Movement into NegP can be considered A-movement in SLQZ, along the lines of movement of verbs into T: this is supported by the fact that simple clausal negation actively interacts with purely morphological and structural processes such as verb movement and affix-hopping in English and other languages. (One possibility is that the VP remnant that raises into spec, NegP2 in (57) turns NegP2 into a derived A-position.) Thus, movement of a QP headed by the clausal negation marker cë’ity into NegP1, generated above MoodP, would be A-movement, and will conse- quently be required to target all intervening A-positions, including MoodP.
Movement of NegP into FocP or higher positions in the CP domain, however, is A’-movement. Since NegP2 is below MoodP, A-movement into NegP by constituents negated by a’ti’ takes place below MoodP. Movement of the negated constituent out of NegP2 into FocP to check focus features is A’-movement, and thus bypasses MoodP, which I will assume is an A-position.
4.4 Constituent Negation 127
The possibility that a’ti’ negation bypasses MoodP is supported by the fact that a’ti’ negation may take place in sentences in which MoodP is activated by another constituent:
58. A’ti’ Gye’eihlly-dya’ nuhnguehll g-a’c studya’aann-za’c neg Mike-dya’ supposed.to irr-be student-good “MIKE isn’t supposed to be a good student.”
In this structure nuhnguehll, “supposed to” is what ML label a “modal auxiliary”: like English modal auxiliaries, it has an invariant Neutral tense/aspect form and does not take any subject marking. SLQZ modal auxiliaries select Irrealis verbs with modal readings. I leave aside the exact structural details of modal auxiliary constructions, but it is clear that mo- dality is independently encoded by the auxiliary, the Irrealis verb, or both in (58). Since MoodP is active, and occupied by the verb or the auxiliary, it is clear that the a’ti’ complex is able to raise licitly past a filled MoodP.
This structure also accounts for the lack of DFC effects in a’ti’ negation, since a’ti’ and -dya’ always surface at some distance from each other, as seen in (57).
4.4.3 Non-Verbal Negation with a’ti’
Now I turn to a’ti’ negation involving non-verbal constituents. These con- structions are parallel to verbal a’ti’ negation: negation targets NegP2 and involves further movement of the negated constituent out of NegP2. I will show, however, that here is a slight difference between structures in which nonverbal predicates (such as 59) are negated, and those in which other constituents (such as 60) are:
59. A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly neg teacher-dya’ neut-be Mike “Mike is not a teacher”
60. A’ti’ Pamm-dya’ z-èe làa’ Cris z-èe
neg Pam-dya’ def-go foc Chris def-go “PAM didn’t leave, Chris did”
In these constructions, as in the verbal negation cases, a’ti’ is base- generated as the head of a QP taking the negated constituent as its com- plement. The complex formed by a’ti’ and its complement raises to NegP2, as in the verbal negation cases, and then, in the cases where the negated constituent is interpreted contrastively, to FocP:
￼
128 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
61.
FocP
QP a’ti’ Pamm
neg Pam
￼￼￼Foc’
Foc XP
X’
X YP
Y
Y’ MoodP
Mood ’ Mood NegP2
tQP
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Neg’
Neg TP -dya’
VP T’ zèe
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Nonverbal predicates negated with a’ti, however, do not normally re- ceive contrastive focus readings, and overt focus movement in SLQZ is generally reserved for purely contrastive, as opposed to presentational, focus. Thus, negated nonverbal predicates must raise to some other posi- tion above NegP2.
In the following sections, I will show that there is independent evidence for the existence of such a position, and independent motivation for non- verbal predicates to make use of it.
4.4.4 A’ti’ in Matrix and Relative Clauses: Evidence for PredP
The first piece of evidence for the existence of the projection XP between FocP and TP comes from the interaction of focus and a’ti’ in matrix and relative clauses. In the previous section, I argued that a’ti’ raises to focus: this is suggested by the fact that negative sentences with a’ti’ disallow focus-fronted constituents:
62. *Gye’eihlly a’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Mike neg teacher-dya neut-be
“MIKE isn’t a teacher”
left T
AgrSP
4.4 Constituent Negation 129
Relative clauses, however, reveal a difference in distribution between a’ti’ and focus-fronted constituents: while focus-fronted constituents are disallowed in relative clauses (64) constituents negated by a’ti’ are allowed (65):
63. A comiied [nih r-yu’lààa’z Gye’eihlly] b-èe’b lohoh me’s top food [rel hab-like Mike perf-lie on table “The food that Mike likes is on the table”
64. *A comiied [nih Gye’eihlly r- yu’lààa’z] b-èe’b lohoh me’s top food [rel Mike hab-like ] perf-lie on table “The food that MIKE likes is on the table”
65. Bùunny [nih a’ti’ campesyenn-dya’n-àa] nu’uh rèe’ person rel neg farmer-dya’ neut-be neut-exist here “The man who’s not a farmer is here”
This suggests that a’ti’ does not occupy FocP in relative clauses, but rather, appears below FocP, but above TP. (Since the next position above a’ti’ in (65) is occupied by the relative marker, it is unlikely that a’ti’ occupies a position higher than FocP.)
Further evidence for a position between FocP and TP—and a hint to its semantic and syntactic function—comes from the fact that predicate nominals may appear preverbally in relative clauses, while contrastively focused constituents can’t:
66. A bùunny nih campesye’nn n-àa nu’uh rèe’
top man rel farmer neut-be neut-exist here “The man who’s a farmer is here”
67. *Bròo’oh ra bx:àady nih mnii’iny b-da’uh
big pl grasshopper rel boy perf-eat “The grasshopper that THE BOY ate are big”
Thus, predicate nominals land lower than FocP in relative clauses, but must still be above TP, since they precede the copula. The existence of a distinct projection for the licensing of nonverbal predicates (PredP) has been independently proposed for Dutch and other languages (Kayne 1997, Zwart, 1993). In SLQZ, predicate nominals/adjectives generally appear above tensed copulas; this suggests PredP is fairly high in SLQZ (above TP). I will thus assume that the preverbal projection XP in (57) and (61) is, in fact, PredP, and is the projection into which negated nonverbal predi- cates surface in relative clauses:
￼
130 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
￼68.
FocP
Foc’
QP
a’ti’me’s neg teacher
￼￼￼Foc
PredP
￼￼Pred’ Pred YP
Y
Y’
￼￼￼￼￼MoodP Mood’
￼￼￼Mood
NegP2
Neg dya’
n-àa is
￼￼tQP
Neg’
VP
￼￼TP
T
T’
DP
AgrSP ....
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Evidence that PredP is not only above TP, but above MoodP, comes from the fact that fronted predicate nominals may occur in sentences in which Irrealis verbs receive modal readings:
69. R-càa’z Gye’eihlly nnsini’cy g-ahc zhi’ny zhya’p Gye’eihlly hab-want Mike intelligent irr-be child girl Mike “Mike wants his daughter to be intelligent.”
Gye’eihlly Mike
4.4 Constituent Negation 131
In this example, the fronted predicate “intelligent” precedes an Irrealis verb with a subjunctive, rather than simple future, reading. Since subjunc- tive readings result from movement through MoodP, this structure sug- gests that the preverbal position hosting the adjectival predicate – PredP – is above MoodP.
The Interaction of FocP and PredP
Non-verbal predicates most often appear preverbally, although they may also appear postverbally. In almost all cases, nonverbal predicates, like constituents negated with a’ti’, behave as if they were in FocP when they appear preverbally. Like contrastively focused constituents, they block other preverbal material, such as wh-words and focus-fronted arguments:
70. Tu n-àa behts-ëng?
who neut-be brother-3s.prox “Who is his brother?”
71. *Tu behts-ëng n-àa?
who brother-3s.prox neut be
“Who is his brother?”
Fronted adjectival, as well as nominal, predicates block wh-movement:
72. Ngàa’ah n-àa mannsaan green neut-be apple “The apple is green”
73. Xi mannsaan n-àa ngàa’ah? what apple neut-be green “Which apple is green?”
74. *Xi mannsaan ngàa’ah n-àa? what apple green neut-be “Which apple is green?”
Embedded clauses (apart from relative clauses and complements of certain modal expressions, which I will leave aside here) generally allow focused arguments. Wh-words, however, cannot be extracted from embedded clauses that contain focused constituents:
￼
132 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
75. Xi r-ralloh lìu’ [g-a’u Gye’eihlly t]? what hab-think 2s irr-eat Mike? “What do you think Mike will eat?”
76. *Xi r-ralloh lìu’ [Gye’eihlly ga’u t]? what hab-think 2s Mike irr-eat “What do you think MIKE will eat?”
In (76), wh-movement of xi “what” out of the embedded clause is blocked by the presence of Gye’eihlly “Mike” in the preverbal focus position.
The possible interpretation of wh-questions is also affected by focus is- land effects. In (77), for instance, x:a mo’od “how” (on its manner inter- pretation) may be interpreted as modifying or questioning the embedded clause:
77. X:a mo’od r-ralloh lìu’ [y-zëhnny Gye’eihlly]?
what way hab-think 2s.inf irr-arrive Mike
“How do you think Mike will arrive?”
[e.g., “By what form of transportation do you think Mike will arrive?”/“What makes you think MIKE will arrive?”]
In (78), the subject of the embedded clause (“Mike”) appears in the pre- verbal focus position. In this case, x:a mo’od “how” cannot be construed as questioning the embedded clause:
78. X:a mo’od rralloh lìu’ [Gye’eihlly y-zëhnny ]?
what way hab-think 2s.inf Mike irr-arrive
“How do you think MIKE will arrive?”
[e.g., “What makes you think MIKE will arrive?”/*”By what form of transportation do you think MIKE will arrive?”]
Thus, x:a mo’od “how” is blocked from raising out of the embedded clause. If it is indeed generated there, the derivation crashes. Because the wh-expression cannot escape the embedded clause, it cannot receive the same interpretation as (77), in which “how” can be interpreted as ques- tioning material in the embedded clause.
The only way for wh-movement to occur, and for the sentence to be grammatical, is to generate x:a mo’od in the matrix clause, where no pre- verbal material blocks its movement. If this is the case, then x:a mo’od should only be interpretable as questioning material in the matrix clause. This prediction is borne out, as seen by the single possible interpretation of (78). In (78), x:a mo’od “how” can only question the addressee’s thinking, not Mike’s arriving. Thus, there are interpretive, as well as structural, effects that result from the islands formed by focused constituents.
￼￼￼
4.4 Constituent Negation 133
Inside relative clauses, however, the distinction between contrastively focused constituents and preverbal nonverbal predicates becomes clear: the former are blocked in relative clauses, while the latter are allowed:
79. Ndyo’oh mnii’iny nih b-da’uh bx:àady
fat child rel perf-eat grasshopper “The child who ate grasshoppers is fat”
80. *Ndyo’oh mnii’iny nih bx:àady b-da’uh fat child rel grasshopper perf-eat “The child who ate GRASSHOPPERS is fat”
81. A bùunny nih campesye’nn g-uhc nu’uh rèe’
top man rel farmer perf-be neut-exist here “The man who was a farmer is here”
This patterning is vaguely reminiscent of V2 effects in Germanic lan- guages: in these languages, V raises to C (the highest head in the clause) when no complementizer is present, but stays low when an overt C is present.
The fact that focused constituents and predicate nominals show different distribution in relative clauses supports the view that FocP and PredP are distinct projections, with PredP being lower than FocP, but still above TP. These raises the question, however, of why they both appear in FocP when not in relative clauses: If a’ti’ and nonverbal predicates may be below FocP in relative clauses, why not in other contexts?
4.4.5 The Focus Criterion
Another context in which a similar asymmetry between relative clauses and regular matrix and embedded clauses occurs is in the case of -zhya’ cliticization. As described in the previous chapter, fronted constituents modified by the modal clitic -zhya’ block focus movement in matrix clauses, and thus were argued to surface in FocP themselves:
82. Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’-rëng
Los Angeles-might neut-exist-3p.prox
“Los Angeles might be where they are (not somewhere else)”
￼￼￼
134 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
83. *Gye’eihlly Lohs Aa’nngl-zhya’ n-u’uh Mike Los Angeles-might neut-exist
“MIKE might be in Los Angeles”
However, constituents with -zhya’ may appear preverbally in relative clauses:
84. A zhyàa’p nih Lia Olieb-zhya’ cë’ity r-umbèe’ n-u’uh rèe’
top girl that Ms. Olivia-might neg hab-know neut-exist here “The girl that Olivia might know/that might know Olivia is here”
This suggests that constituents modified by -zhya’, like predicate nomi- nals, are required to raise to FocP in all cases except in relative clauses, where they obligatorily remain below FocP.
The inability of focused constituents to appear in relative clauses stems from the fact that relative clauses inherently involve wh-movement from inside the relative clause to the specifier of the relative clause. This movement either involves a covert operator base-generated inside the rela- tive clause and coindexed with a relative clause head base-generated higher in the structure (as traditionally assumed) or overt movement of the relative clause head itself from a base-generated position inside the relative clause to its surface position outside of it (Kayne 1994, Vergnaud 1985).
Wh-movement itself involves the focus projection, and is blocked by filled FocPs, as seen by the preceding data. This has also been noted in Hungarian, among other languages; cf. Horvath 1986. (However, as I will make clear in the next chapter, while wh-movement involves focus move- ment, wh-movement and focus movement are not a single, interchangeable process.) Thus, in relative clauses, FocP is always occupied by the trace of the wh-moved constituent. Because FocP is always filled in relative clauses, nonverbal predicates cannot occupy it: they must either remain in their base post-verbal positions, or must raise only as far as PredP.
But what about the non-relative-clause cases? Why is movement of pre- verbal non-verbal predicates to FocP required? That is, why can’t focused constituents co-occur with preverbal predicates in PredP, since movement of nonverbal predicates to FocP is clearly not necessary for them to be licit, as seen by their presence in PredP inside relative clauses?
I will propose the following: The fact that movement to FocP is obliga- tory in the absence of other focused constituents or wh-words suggests that FocP has a strong tendency to attract constituents, and that SLQZ prefers for FocP to be filled whenever possible. Thus, I will argue that the follow- ing condition holds:
85. Focus Criterion: FocP must be overtly filled at some point in the derivation
￼￼
4.4 Constituent Negation 135
This can be motivated semantically, as well as empirically. Focus serves to express new information, and all linguistic expressions involve convey- ance of new information. In the absence of contrastively focused informa- tion (such as focused arguments), the entire sentence itself represents a proposition to be contrasted against previous background in- formation.
Thus, the Focus Criterion is reflected in the syntax in the following way: When a constituent is contrastively focused, it raises to spec, FocP. In the absence of contrastive focus, the entire clause (TP) raises to FocP (irrele- vant projections omitted):
86.
When a non-verbal predicate or a negated non-verbal predicate raises to PredP, it undergoes further movement itself to satisfy the Focus Criterion. This effectively blocks the possibility of additional focused constituents within the clause:
￼FocP
TP Foc’
Foc ....t
￼￼￼87.
FocP NP/AdjP Foc’
Foc
Movement of the XP predicate itself to FocP, rather than movement of the entire clause dominated by PredP, is motivated reasons of economy: In his (1992, 1995) Minimalist program, Chomsky argues that multiple movements of a single constituent constitute formation of a single chain, and thus count as a single move. This argument was motivated by need to reconcile the often-conflicting requirements that syntactive structures be derived by means of the shortest moves possible (Chomsky’s “Shortest Moves” condition) and the smallest number of moves possible (the “Few- est Steps” condition). These requirements come into conflict in a number of derivations, such as successive-cyclic wh-movement, in which wh- words move long distances by landing in a number in intermediate posi- tions: while this is consistent with “Shortest Move”, it violates “Fewest Steps”. Chomksy’s chain-formation condition, then, reconciles this con- flict.
￼￼￼PredP
￼t
136 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
Returning to SLQZ, this would mean that movement of a non-verbal predicate to PredP, then subsequent movement of TP would result in the formation of two separate chains, thus two moves. This is a more costly option in Minimalist terms than movement of a non-verbal predicate into PredP, then into FocP, which would count as only a single move. The co- occurrence restrictions between fronted nonverbal predicates and focus support this: if the preverbal predicate were required to only raise as far as PredP, nothing would stop other contrastively focused constituents from raising past it into FocP. Certainly, no semantic factors would prevent this. Thus, this co-occurrence restriction must be driven by strictly syntactic considerations.
The Focus Criterion also explains the relative rarity of sentences with multiple preverbal constituents, despite the existence of numerous prever- bal projections: because Minimalist requirements force any constituent raised to a preverbal position to also raise though FocP to satisfy the Focus Criterion, the presence of additional constituents in Focus is thus blocked. Thus, fronted non-verbal predicates and fronted constituents with the modal clitic -zhya’ cannot co-occur with other focused constituents, even though no semantic factors would prevent this.
In this section, then, I have argued for two points: first, for the existence of a preverbal projection PredP directly below FocP; and second, for a general requirement that FocP be overtly activated in all SLQZ clauses (the Focus Criterion). In the next section, I will present evidence for the second preverbal projection beneath focus posited in the trees in (57) and (61): TopP2, a topic projection that occupies the position directly below PredP.
4.4.6 Evidence for TopP2: The Interaction of Topics and Negation
Now I turn to the identity of the projection marked YP in the preceding trees. I will show that this projection is the lower of two topic projections in SLQZ. SLQZ has two types of topics: left-dislocated topics, which in- volve a resumptive copy of the topic in the body of the clause, and topics preceded by the topic marker a :
88. Gye’eihlly xi b-da’uh Gye’eihlly? Mike what perf-eat Mike “(As for) Mike, what did he eat?”
￼
4.4 Constituent Negation 137
89. A Gye’eihlly b-da’uh bx:àady
TOP Mike perf-eat grasshopper
“Mike (whom we were talking about) ate grasshoppers”
Left-dislocated topics are high. They may precede focus-fronted con- stituents and wh-words (as seen in the preceding example); a-topics appear preverbally (thus above TP), but surface below FocP (evidence for this will be presented shortly.) I thus assume two independent topic projec- tions: TopP1, which is above FocP and houses left-dislocated topics; and TopP2, which houses a-topics.
The interaction of a-topics with verb movement gives suggestive evi- dence as to the exact location of TopP2. As noted in the previous chapter, a-topics block the raising of verbs past the adverb al “already”:
￼90.
91.
A Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady
top Mike already perf-eat grasshopper “Mike already ate the grasshoppers”
*A Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady
top Mike perf-eat already grasshopper “Mike already ate the grasshoppers”
Contrastively focused arguments, on the other hand, do not block such movement.
92. Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady
Mike already perf-eat grasshopper “MIKE already ate the grasshoppers”
93. Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady
Mike perf-eat already grasshopper “MIKE already ate the grasshoppers”
Thus, TopP2, the licensing projection for a-topics, occupies a position lower than focus. (Potentially, TopP2 could be the position targeted by VP remnants moving past al, “already”.) Also notable is the fact that a-topics cannot co-occur with negation (either clausal or constituent):
94. *A Gye’eihlly cë’ity b-da’uh-dya’ bx:àady top Mike neg perf-eat-dya’ grasshoppers “Mike didn’t eat the grasshoppers”
138 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
95. *A Gye’eihlly a’ti’ doctoor-dya’ n-àa top Mike neg doctor-dya’ neut-be “Mike isn’t a doctor”
The fact that a-topics cannot co-occur with a’ti’ negation is consistent with the argument that a’ti’ generally raises through PredP to FocP, and TopP is below both PredP and FocP. The fact that they cannot co-occur with clausal negation (that is, with cë’ity) also supports the idea that TopP may be even lower than PredP: Recall from Section 2.2 that clausal nega- tion structures do allow focus-fronted constituents:
96. Gye’eihlly cë’ity b-da’uh bx:àady Mike neg perf-eat grasshoppers “MIKE didn’t eat the grasshoppers”
When focus appears with clausal negation, -dya’ is generally dropped, as previously noted. This effect was argued to be a result of the GDCF, whereby -dya’, the head of NegP, is dropped so that cë’ity, the specifier of NegP, may remain in NegP1 when specifiers of higher projections are occupied and prevent its further movement.
It is possible (though less common), however, for -dya’ to appear overtly in clausal negation cases with focus fronting:
97. Gye’eihlly cë’ity b-da’uh-dya’ bx:àady Mike neg perf-eat-dya’grasshoppers “MIKE didn’t eat the grasshoppers”
This suggests that cë’ity and the negated verb have the option of rais- ing into a projection higher than NegP1, but lower than FocP, when overtly focused constituents appear. (It is unclear why this option is dis- preferred.) This position could either be PredP or TopP.
Either possibility would be consistent with the idea that a-topics surface in positions below FocP. If cë’ity raised into PredP, the co-occurrence restriction between cë’ity and a-topics could be accounted for by the fact that a-topics need to occupy either PredP itself or some lower preverbal position. As previously argued, however, PredP is reserved for the licens- ing of nonverbal (untensed) arguments: thus, it would be inconsistent to posit PredP as a possible landing position for cë’ity and negated verbs in clausal negation structures.
If cë’ity and the verb raised into TopP, below PredP, however, the in- ability of a-topics to appear with clausal negation can be accounted for in similar terms: both the fronted topic and cë’ity are competing for the same position (spec, TopP), and thus cannot appear together.
￼
4.4 Constituent Negation 139
The possibility of cë’ity and the verb occupying TopP is supported by the fact that the topic marker a may also precede verbs. (It is unclear what the semantic contribution a makes in these contexts):
98. A b-ìi’lly Gye’eihlly li’ebr top perf-read Mike book “Mike read the book”
While focused constituents may not intervene between fronted wh-words and verbs, the topic marker a may appear preverbally after wh- words:
99. Tu a b-ìi’lly li’ebr? who top perf-read book “Who read the book?”
This supports the idea that constituents modified by the topic marker a , including verbs, surface in their own projection (TopP) below both FocP and PredP. This is also consistent with the argument that the clausal nega- tion marker cë’ity and the negated verb can raise into TopP.
The possibility of clausal negation structures both with and without -dya’ raises a more general question: if syntactic structures converge on the most economical derivation possible, why should structures like (97), which involve additional movement into TopP, be allowed to co-exist in SLQZ along with more economical structures such as (96)? A reasonable conjecture would be that the two structures differ in semantics or prag- matic usage. This would be consistent with Minimalist assumptions that movement is driven by the feature-checking requirements of the moved constituent, and that functional projections contain semantic or structural features that satisfy these requirements. Movement of a negated constituent into TopP in (97), then, must necessarily involve checking of a Topic fea- ture encoded in the negated constituent. Movement into TopP is not moti- vated, and thus, not permitted, in the absence of Topic features. Thus, the negated constituent in (96), which surfaces in NegP1, can be assumed to lack a Topic feature.
In short, there is evidence for an additional functional projection below FocP and PredP—TopP—that houses fronted topics and serves as a poten- tial landing spot for negated constituents in certain syntactic configura- tions. The inventory of preverbal functional projections argued for in this chapter, then, is as follows:
￼
140 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
￼100. TopP1
FocP
PredP
￼￼￼￼￼￼TopP2 NegP1
￼￼￼￼MoodP NegP2
TP
￼￼￼￼Moreover, it can be shown that movement into any of the numerous functional projections argued for in this section is motivated by both the structural requirements of Antisymmetry and the feature-checking re- quirements of the moved constituents. Convergent derivations must satisfy both sets of requirements.
4.5 Existential Negation: the Tèe’bag Construction
The third negation construction I will discuss is existential and indefinite negation: that is, the formation of negative constructions such as no X, no- body, and nothing. This construction, which is more complex than those previously discussed, will shed light on a number of other grammatical constructions in SLQZ, such as the expression of indefiniteness and quan- tification. It will also show that VP-raising can account for not only the syntactic behavior of SLQZ, but some semantic behavior as well. I will begin this section with a descriptive overview of these constructions, then move to a syntactic analysis.
4.5.1 Negative Indefinites
In constructions expressing negative indefinites (such as nothing, nobody, and nowhere), tèe’bag and a wh-word directly precede the verb, and -dya’ directly follows the verb:
101. Tèe’bag calìi ch-o’o-dy-ënn izhih
no where irr-go-dya’-1p tomorrow “We won’t go anywhere tomorrow”
102. Tèe’bag tu g-a’uw-dya’ gueht no who irr-eat-dya’ tortilla
“No one will eat tortillas”
This closely parallels the formation of non-negative indefinites (such as something, someone etc.), which are formed with the verb nu’uh “exist” followed by a wh-word and a verb taking the indefinite as an argument:
103. N-u’uh tu b-da’uhgueht neut-exist who perf-eat tortilla “Someone ate tortillas”
Tèe’bag may negate more than one argument simultaneously:
104. Tèe’bag tu xi cay-a’uw-dya’ no who what prog-eat-dya’
“No one is eating anything”
105. Tèe’bag tu cali ny-ied-dya’ no who where subj-go-dya’ “No one went anywhere”
No constituents may appear between the wh-indefinite and the verb in negative indefinite constructions:
106. *Tèe’bag xi Gyeeihlly n-yauw-dya’ no what Mike subj-eat-dya’ “Mike didn’t eat anything”
The use of wh-words as indefinite pronouns in tèe’bag negation is remi- niscent of similar constructions in numerous languages, such as Chinese (Cheng 1991, Li 1992), Tzotzil (Aissen 1992) , Dutch (H. Koopman, p.c.) and Western Apache (Potter 1997), in which wh-words under the scope of negation are interpreted as indefinite pronouns or negative polarity “any”, rather than as question markers. I will return to examine these parallels more closely later in this chapter.
4.5.2 Existential Negation
Existential negation constructions are formed with the negative word tèe’bag and a wh-word that serves as an indefinite marker referring to the negated constituent. In these constructions, the wh-indefinite corresponds in animacy to the negated constituent. The wh-word is followed by the ne gated nominal itself, then the negative clitic -dya’ :
4.5 Existential Negation 141
￼
142 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
107. Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap no who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes “No student ate potatoes”
108. Tèe’bag xi gueht-dya’ b-da’uw-a’ no what tortilla-dya’ perf-eat-1s “I ate no tortillas”
This construction differs from that of negative indefinites in that -dya’ follows the negated nominal itself, rather than the verb. In the next section, I will discuss the semantic motivation for this difference.
4.5.3 Semantic Correlates
The differences in structure between the existential negation constructions in (101-102) and the negative indefinite constructions in (107-108) reflect differences in the semantic structure of the events involved. Thus, the pre- ceding two negative indefinite examples can be paraphrased as follows:
￼￼￼109. Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap
no who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes
“No student ate potatoes”
“There exists no x, x a student, such that x ate potatoes”
110. Tèe’bag xi gueht-dya’ b-da’uw-a’
no what tortilla-dya’ perf-eat-1s
“I ate no tortillas”
“There exists no x, x a tortilla, such as I ate x”
￼￼In these cases, the value of x is restricted: existential negation only holds of x if x has the property of being a student in (109), for example. Thus, the negated constituent serves as the restrictor on quantification. The scope of negation appears to be reflected in the placement of the negative elements tèe’bag and -dya’: tèe’bag precedes, and -dya’ directly follows, the nominal that serves as the restrictor.
In the negative existential constructions (111-112), in contrast, there is no explicit restrictor on quantification. This is made explicit by the glosses below:
111. Tèe’bag tu g-a’uw-dya’ gueht no who irr-eat-dya’ tortilla
“No one will eat tortillas”
“There exists no x such that x eats tortillas”
￼
4.5 Existential Negation 143
112. Tèe’bag xi cay-a’uw-dy-a’
no what prog-eat-dya’-1s
“I’m not eating anything”
“There exists no x such as I’m eating x”
In these cases, x is not restricted to having a particular property, as it is in (109-110). The negation can be interpreted as taking scope over the entire event: (111) can be paraphrased “There will be no event of anyone eating tortillas” and (112) as “There is no event of me eating anything.”
The postverbal position of -dya’ is semantically motivated by the fact that verbs in SLQZ are in fact raised VPs. If inflected verbs in SLQZ are indeed VPs, not V heads, then they contain the traces of raised arguments. These traces could be treated as variables that can be bound by their raised antecedents and/or quantifiers such as tèe’bag.
Assuming that nonspecific indefinites reconstruct into VP at LF and are interpreted in the nuclear scope and bound by existential closure (as pro- posed by Diesing 1992), then tèe’bag and -dya’ can be seen as negating the entire event denoted by the VP and its reconstructed indefinite argu- ments. In other words, (111) can alternately be glossed “there was no event of anyone eating tortillas”. Thus, the postverbal position of -dya’ reflects the fact that negation in these constructions takes scope over an entire event, rather than a restrictor of quantification.
Positing inflected verbs as VPs also makes the examples in (107-108) consistent syntactically with those in (101-102): in both cases, tèe’bag... -dya’ can be seen as directly preceding and following phrasal projections, rather than a phrasal projection in one case and a verbal head in another.
4.5.4 Towards a Syntactic Structure for Tèe’bag Constructions
This section presents a syntactic analysis of these constructions. First, I will examine other non-interrogative uses of wh-words in SLQZ. Then, I will review common features of wh-indefinites in other languages, and examine how analyses made for these languages can be applied to SLQZ. From this point, I will develop a detailed syntactic structure for the tèe’bag constructions previously described.
Wh-Indefinites and Non-Interrogative Wh-Words in SLQZ
As previously noted, wh-words are also used as indefinite pronouns in non-negative existential constructions with the verb nu’uh: “exist”. These structures are strikingly similar to the tèe’bag constructions with negated indefinites: for one, nu’uh may take scope over more than one argument (as may tèe’bag), and the order the indefinites appear in is fixed:
￼￼
144 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
￼113. 114. 115.
N-u’uh tu xi b-da’uw neut-exist who what perf-eat “Someone ate something”
*N-u’uh xi tu b-da’uw neut-exist what who perf-eat “Someone ate something”
Tèe’bag tu xi cay-a’uw-dya’ no who what prog-eat-dya’ “No one is eating anything”
￼￼The appearance of more than one preverbal wh-word in nu’uh and tèe’bag constructions is surprising, since SLQZ only marginally allows multiple wh-questions (and some speakers do not allow them at all). This suggests that wh-indefinites in these contexts behave differently from in- terrogative wh-expressions.
The similarity in structure between tèe’bag and nu’uh constructions suggests that tèe’bag and nu’uh are the same type of constituent. Since nu’uh is clearly a verb (it may take different aspect markers, as well as subject agreement clitics for pronominal subjects), it may be possible that tèe’bag is a predicate, rather than a quantifier. Direct evidence for this, however, is difficult to find: tèe’bag does not take aspect or subject agree- ment markers, so if it is a predicate, it is a morphologically impoverished one. Evidence against the predicate status of tèe’bag, however, comes from the fact that cëi’ty may also appear interchangeably with tèe’bag in negative existential and negative indefinite constructions. These structures are identical to those formed with tèe’bag, except for the presence of cë’ity:
116. Cë’ity tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap neg who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes
“No student ate potatoes”
If cë’ity is indeed a quantifier (as was argued earlier) it is highly unlikely that a syntactically distinct constituent should be able to replace it freely in otherwise identical structures.4
Wh-words are used as indefinite pronouns in a second existential con- struction as well. In this construction, the wh-words are preceded by the word dòonn “whether, if”. The example below shows do’onn used with its
,
4 Munro (class lectures), however, suggests that the fact that cëi ty may appear
with pronominal subject agreement markers in sentences with negated Irrealis
verbs suggests the possible verbal/predicational status of cëi'ty . She also points
￼to other languages in which negation is realized by verbal forms. (A different
,
account for the cooccurrence of cëi ty and subject agreement markers, which
,
assumes the quantificational status of cëi ty , is proposed in Lee 1996 (summa-
rized in the preceding chapter)).
4.5 Existential Negation 145
independent meaning of “whether/if” (in which it introduces an indirect question); the examples that follow show its use with wh-indefinites:
117. R-càaz-zy-a’ g-ahcbì-a’ do’onn a r-zehnny hab-want-just-1s irr-know-1s if already hab- arrive “I just want to know if
e-mail rèe’ lòo’
e-mail this to.you
this e-mail gets to you” (ML, entry for do’onn)
118. Ngaista’ do’onn cali ch-o’-nn
in.a.while if where irr-go-1p now day
“Later today, we’ll go somewhere (we don’t know where)”
(ML, entry for do’onn)
119. Do’onn x:a mo’od g-uny-ih
if what way irr-do-3s.prx
“I’ll do it somehow (I don’t know how)” (ML, entry for do’onn)
The do’onn-wh construction differs from the nu’uh-wh construction in that it does not allow more than one wh-indefinite to follow it directly:
120. Tòo’oh ch-i-gwì -ënn dòonn tu g-uuny gaan
￼let’s.go irr-go-see-1p “Let’s go see who wins”
if who irr-do win
121. *Tòo’oh ch-i-gwì -ënn dòonn tu xi g-uuny gaan let’s.go irr-go-see-1p if who what irr-do win “Let’s go see who wins what ”
Both the do’onn and nu’uh indefinite formation constructions, however, express only non-specific (narrow-scope) indefinites. As the examples above show, do’onn-wh can only denote still-unidentified entities. A simi- lar (but less marked) distinction holds for nu’uh indefinites, as seen in the contrast below:
122. A teihby nih r-umbèe Gyeeihlly z-uu jwer top one rel hab-know Mike def-stand outside “Someone that Mike knows is outside”
123. N-u’uh tu nih r-umbèe Gyeeihlly z-uu jwer neut-exist who rel hab-know Mike def-stand outside “Someone that Mike knows is outside”
nah zhih
146 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
Garcia notes a difference in speaker presupposition between (122) with teihby, and (123) with nu’uh tù. The teihby example would be used if, for instance, only one person were at the door and the speaker knew that Mike knew this person. The sentence with nu’uh tu would be used if there were more than one person at the door, and the speaker had reason to believe that Mike knows one of these people, but had no idea which of these peo- ple it would be. In short, teihby can be used to refer to specific indefinites, while nu’uh -wh refers to non-specific indefinites.
SLQZ wh-words may also be used non-interrogatively (that is, in con- texts other than direct or indirect wh-questions) in a number of other, non- existential constructions.
Xi “what”, for instance, may be used to introduce exclamatives:
124. Xi tuxhmaan! what week
“What a week!” (ML, entry for xi)
Xi also appears as part of the lexical expression xi zhë’b “how much” used in exclamatives of degree. (Note that zhë’b by itself can also be used to mean “how much”; the semantic redundancy present in the gloss of the following example, compounded by the presence of zyè iny “a lot”, shows that the expression xi zhë’b has probably become lexicalized:
125. Xi zhë’b zyèeiny r-a’uhw-u’
what how.much a.lot hab-eat 2s
“How much you eat!” (ML, entry for xi zhë’b)
Xi also appears in a number of other lexicalized expressions denoting degrees or periods of time:
126. Xi wyahc s-aa zhi’ny-a’
what time def-walk child-1s
“It will be a long time until my child walks” (ML, entry for xi wyahc )
127. Xi laa zhih what name day
“a long time ago”
(ML, entry for xi laa zhih)
Temporal expressions with xi seem to denote markedly long periods of time.
A possibility that I will consider is that these expressions are derived from exclamatives such as “(what a) long time”, etc. This analysis is con- sistent with both the syntactic parallel between these expressions and true exclamative uses of xi “what” such as (124), and with the observation that exclamatives introduced by wh-words can only be predicated on qualities
￼￼
4.5 Existential Negation 147
that can be measured on a gradable scale, such as size and time (Cresswell 1973, cited in Gutiérrez Rexach 1996):
128. How tall he is!
129. What a long time this is taking!
These expressions also differ from other wh-indefinite expressions in that the wh-expression is clause-initial, as it is generally in wh-questions: in tèe’bag and existential constructions, the wh-word appears to get its non-interrogative, indefinite reading by being preceded by a negative or existential term. In short, the indefinite interpretation of wh-words in SLQZ appears to be syntactically determined. Syntactic and semantic motivation for this constraint will be examined in the next section.
The Use of Wh-Indefinites in Other Languages
Wh-words appear with indefinite, rather than interrogative, uses in a num- ber of languages unrelated to SLQZ (such as Chinese (Cheng 1992, Li 1991), Hungarian (Cheng 1992), Tzotzil (Aissen 1992), Dutch (H. Koop- man, p.c.), and Western Apache (Potter 1997)). In these languages, as in SLQZ, the indefinite use of wh-words is limited to certain syntactic con- texts. Below, I will give brief synopses of the salient features of wh- indefinite constructions in Chinese (the most widely documented of the languages with wh-indefinites) and Western Apache (whose wh-indefinite constructions share important semantic features with those in SLQZ).
In Chinese, wh-words may be interpreted as indefinite pronouns in negative constructions (130), yes/no questions (131), conditional clauses (132), and in complements of non-factive verbs (133):
130. Ta bu xihuan shenme he not like what
“He doesn’t like anything” (Li 1992, p. 127)
131. Ta xihuan shenme ma? he like what Q
“Does he like something/anything?” (Li 1992, p. 128)
132. Yaoshi/Ruguo ta xihuan shenme...
if he like what “If he likes anything...”
(Li 1992, p. 128)
￼
148 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
133. Wo yiwei/renwei/cai/xiwang ni xihuan shenme (dongxi) I think/think/guess/hope you like what (thing)
“I think/think/guess/hope you like something” (Li 1992, p. 128)
These contexts have been posited as “affective contexts” (Cheng 1991, p. 112), and “contexts in which the truth value of the proposition is not fixed in a definite manner” (Li 1992, p. 134).
Li supports this definition by pointing out that wh-words receive may also receive indefinite readings in the presence of adverbs expressing speaker uncertainty (such as “probably”) and grammatical particles ex- pressing a speaker’s lack of direct experience of an event he/she is assert- ing to be true.
Furthermore, the availability of indefinite readings for wh-expressions is syntactically, as well as semantically, constrained in Chinese: in negated sentences, for instance, wh-words can only be interpeted as indefinites if c- commanded by negation. Thus, object, but not subject, wh-words may be interpreted as indefinites in negative contexts:
134. Ta bu xihuan shenme he not like what
“He doesn’t like anything” (Li 1992, p. 135)
135. Shenme ren bu xihuan ta?
what man not like he
“Who does not like him?”
“ Someone does not like him” (Li 1992, p. 135)
Li thus treats wh-indefinites as variables that require c-command by a local binder. This seems to parallel their usage in SLQZ.
Western Apache, an Athabaskan language, likewise uses wh-words as indefinites in certain semantic and syntactic contexts. One salient context in which wh-words receive indefinite, rather than interrogative, readings is when they directly precede the marker shi. (Compare (136) and (137)). Shi can also be used as a modal particle that modifies entire clauses (138):
136. Hadín kih náágole’ ?
who house 3sg.imprf.build “Who is building a house?”
(Potter 1997, p. 94)
137. Hadínshi kih náágole’? who.UNCERT house 3sg.imprf.build “Someone is building a house” (Potter 1997, p. 94)
￼
4.5 Existential Negation 149
138. Nailín magashi naízyood shi
girl cattle 3sg.perf.herd might
“The girl might have finished herding the cattle” (Potter 1997, p. 93)
Potter analyses shi as a head that takes either clauses or wh-indefinites as complements: these complements then raise to the specifier of the projection in which shi is generated, thus accounting for the fact that shi directly follows the constituents it modifies.
Potter draws a semantic parallel between the modal and indefinite- forming uses of shi: in its modal use, shi serves to express speaker uncer- tainty about the truth of an event (such as whether the cattle have been herded in (138)). When used as indefinites, wh-words in Western Apache assert the existence of something without committing the speaker to knowing the exact identity of this element. Thus, shi serves to express a tentative level of speaker assertion of an event in both contexts. In the fol- lowing section, I will outline an application of this idea to SLQZ.
4.5.5 The Syntax of WH-Indefinites in SLQZ
The previous section showed that wh-indefinites in SLQZ may appear in the following contexts: in tèe’bag negation constructions, in narrow-scope indefinite constructions, and in exclamative constructions and lexicalized expressions potentially derived from exclamatives.
These contexts share a common semantic feature: like wh-indefinite constructions in Chinese, they represent propositions with reversed or un- fixed truth values. That negation reverses the truth value of a proposition is obvious. Exclamatives, as noted often in the literature (Lewis 1972, cited in Gutiérrez Rexach 1996) are distinguished by the fact that they do not have inherent truth values of their own (there is no way, for instance, that an exclamative such as “What a week!” can be posited to have an absolute truth value).
The use of wh-indefinites in existential constructions appears at first glance to be a counterexample to this, but the fact that only non-specific indefinites may be expressed in constructions with wh-indefinites supports the idea that the speaker is expressing uncertainty about the identity of a participant in the event being described. The weak level of speaker cer- tainty in these contexts seems to parallel the “tentative assertion” ex- pressed by wh-words in the specifier of a modal marker in Western Apache.
This raises the issue of how this translates into a syntactic structure. The existential and tèe’bag structures suggest that SLQZ, like Chinese, re- quires wh-indefinites to be c-commanded by an operator. Furthermore, wh-words in affective contexts such as conditional clauses and yes/no questions only receive indefinite readings when preceded by nu’uh. This supports Cheng’s (1991) idea that wh-indefinites are necessarily bound by
￼
150 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
existential closure, and suggests that nu’uh/tèe’bag is responsible for pro- viding existential closure over wh-indefinites in these contexts:
139. Y-nnì-ùu’ nàa’ bàll n-u’uh calì y ch-ìa’ Gyeeihlly irr-tell-2s 1s if neut-exist where irr-go Mike “Tell me if Mike goes anywhere”
140. N-u’uh tu ca-ya’uw ee? neut-exist who prog-eat Q “Is anyone eating?”
Thus, in SLQZ the mere appearance in an affective context is not enough to license the indefinite reading of wh-words: they must also be syntactically dominated (c-commanded) by a semantically appropriate licenser, such as tèe’bag or nu’uh.
4.5.6 The Syntax of Tèe’bag Negation
In the previous section, I showed that the wh-words in tèebag negation constructions are indefinite pronouns that need to be syntactically (and semantically) licensed by tèebag. In the following sections, I will present explicit syntactic analyses of negative indefinite and existential negation constructions. First, I will address the position of tèebag itself, then turn to the negative indefinite and existential negation constructions themselves.
Where is Tèe’bag?
Tèe’bag shares many distributional features with a’ti’. For one, tèe’bag negation, like a’ti’ negation, may appear in wh-questions (141) but not with focus-fronted constituents (142):
141. Tu tèe’bag xi li’ebr-dya’ ny-ùall who no what book-dya’ subj-read “Who didn’t read any book?”
142. Gye’eihlly tèe’bag xi ny-a’uhw-dya’
Mike no what subj-eat-dya’
“Mike didn’t eat anything/*MIKE didn’t eat anything”
Fronted arguments can only be interpreted as answers to wh-questions, not as contrastively focused. The following can only be used as an answer to the question “Who didn’t eat anything?”.
This suggests that like a’ti’, tèe’bag generally surfaces in FocP. How- ever, like a’ti’, tèe’bag may also appear at the left edge inside relative clauses:
￼
4.5 Existential Negation 151
143. Studya’aann nih tèe’bag tu mee’s-dya’r-yu’lààa’z n-u’uh rèe’ student that no who teacher-dya’ hab-like neut-exist here “The student who no teacher likes/who likes no teachers is here”
As shown in section 4.4.4, this is a position in which focused constitu- ents are normally blocked. This was used as evidence that a’ti’ surfaces in PredP, a position above TP, but below FocP in relative clauses. I thus assume that tèe’bag does as well.
Another parallel between a’ti’ negation and tèe’bag negation is that there are no GDCF effects in tèe’bag constructions: -dya’ is obligatory even when preverbal constituents such as wh-words appear:
144. *Tu tèe’bag xi li’ebr ny-ùall who no what book subj-read “Who didn’t read any book?”
This suggests that like a’ti’, tèe’bag obligatorily surfaces in a position above NegP.
Like a’ti’ negation, tèe’bag negation also shows no Irrealis Negation effects: Irrealis verbs under tèe’bag negation receive standard future read- ings, rather than imperative or subjunctive-like readings:
145. Tèe’bag xi g-a’uh-dya’ Gye’eihlly no what irr-eat-dya’ Mike “Mike won’t eat anything”
This indicates that verbs negated by tèe’bag , like those negated by a’ti’, move through NegP2 rather than NegP1: since they do not change modal features under negation, they do not pass through MoodP as do verbs that undergo clausal negation with cë’ity. This in turn indicates that the nega- tive features of tèe’bag (and the constituents it negates) must be checked below MoodP. Thus, tèe’bag negation, like a’ti’ negation, is licensed by movement through the lower negative projection, NegP2.
The Syntax of Negative Indefinites
The negative indefinite construction is composed of the tèe’bag-wh com- plex followed by the verb, then the particle -dya’. Below is an example repeated from above:
146. Tèe’bag tu b-da’uh-dya’ gueht no who perf-eat-dya’ tortilla “No one ate tortillas”
From the previous sections, it should be clear that the underlying struc- ture for this construction must meet several criteria: first, wh-indefinites must precede the verb and surface directly after tèe’bag; second, tèe’bag
￼
152 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
must raise at least as high as PredP; third, negation must be licensed in the lower negative projection, NegP2; and finally, both the wh-indefinites and the verb must appear under the scope of
-dya’.
I will thus assume the following derivation for negative indefinites.
As previously mentioned, tèe’bag is problematic in that it patterns with nu’uh “exist”, a verbal predicate, in how it forms sentences with wh- indefinites, yet it lacks verbal morphology and behaves like a quantifica- tional determiner. For instance, it can be used as a stand-alone negative answer to a question:
147. Q: Tu r-indyalààa’z-u’? who hab-believe-2s.inf
“Who do you believe?”
A: Tèebag Nobody
If it is a determiner, however, then it is puzzling how it can take scope over more than one wh-indefinite – each originating as an independent argument – simultaneously.
These facts can be reconciled as follows: tèe’bag, like cëi’ty, is a quanti- fier that selects a VP complement. However, while cëi’ty can take any VP as its complement, tèe’bag allows only one verbal complement: a covert existential verb that is essentially a silent version of nu’uh. This covert ex- istential verb, in turn, takes as its complement the overt VP and its argu- ments (irrelevant projections omitted below):5
148.
neg
￼QP
Q’
Q VP tèe’bag
￼￼￼￼V’
V VP
E
￼￼￼tu bda’uh gueht who ate tortilla
A consequence of this is that tèe’bag itself cannot be posited to have its own existential force: this must come from the covert existential predicate it takes as its complement. Rather, tèe’bag itself encodes only negation.
5 The presence of a covert existential predicate under clausal negation in future Ir realis constructions was also argued for in Chapter 3.
￼
4.5 Existential Negation 153
Thus, the clausal negation marker cë’ity, which also subcategorizes VP complements, may appear interchangeably with tèe’bag in negative exis- tential constructions. This also accounts for why tèe’bag constructions so closely resemble existential constructions: they contain a covert existential structure.
Further evidence for the presence of a covert existential predicate comes from the following utterance recorded in San Lucas Quiaviní. Here, a related negative word tèeru’ “no more” appears in a negative existential construction with no visible verb: instead, tèeru’ is followed by a wh-indefinite pronoun then -di’:6
149. Tèeru xi di èee? no.more what dya’ Q
“There isn’t anything else?”
This structure appears to be parallel to the future Irrealis negation con- structions discussed earlier in this chapter.
I assume the structure in (148) is monoclausal: a single set of inflec- tional projections dominates both the covert existential VP and its lexical VP complement. In short, the covert existential simply forms an additional VP shell as part of the main predicate.
The wh-indefinite subject above is generated as a normal argument of the lexical VP, in the specifier of VPcaus. (Wh-indefinite objects are like- wise generated like normal object DPs.) It then raises to adjoin to spec VP (VPasp, which contains an spatiotemporal event argument in its specifier (this point will be discussed in the next chapter)). This marks the wh- indefinite as a variable identified with the event denoted by the verb.
In constructions with more than one wh-indefinite, the lower one ad- joins to spec, VPasp, then the higher wh-indefinite adjoins to the lower one. For instance, in (150) xi “what” adjoins to bda’uw “ate” then tu “who” to xi.
150. Tèe’bag tu xi b-da’uw-dya’ neg who what perf-eat-dya’ “Nobody ate anything”
6 Tèe’bag itself is potentially bimorphemic: -bag is a common clitic used to ex- press emphasis. I will assume, however, that tèe’bag is treated as a single lexi- cal item.
￼￼
154 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
￼￼￼DP DP D’
VPasp
V’
￼￼￼￼V b- perf
what
VPcaus
tj V’
V VP
ti
￼￼￼￼D’
xii
￼￼D
￼￼￼D tuj who
V’
￼However, the head of VPasp is already occupied by the Perfective aspect marker b-. Thus, the wh-indefinite (or indefinites) cannot remain in spec, VPasp without incurring a GDCF violation; it must subsequently move elsewhere. I will return to this point momentarily.
In the preceding example, then, the wh-indefinite tu is generated VP- internally as the subject of “eat”:
151. Tèe’bag tu b-da’uh-dya’ gueht no who perf-eat-dya’ tortilla “No one ate tortillas”
VPasp
V’
V -da’uh
eat
￼￼￼V b-
perf.
DP
D’
D
tu who
VPcaus
V’
￼￼￼￼￼V
DP
VPstem
V’
V -da’uh
eat
￼￼￼￼￼gueht tortilla
From this base configuration, the DP object (“tortillas”) raises out to spec, AgrOP, as usual, and tu raises to the specifier of VPasp:
152.
DPj
AgrOP AgrO’
4.5 Existential Negation 155
￼￼￼￼AgrO QP D’
D gueht
tortilla
￼￼Q’
Q VP tèe’bag
￼￼neg
V’
DPi D’
￼￼V
E
who
VPasp
V b-
perf.
V’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼ti
VPcaus
V’
￼￼D VVP tu
tj
However, tu “who” is in an illegal configuration: as previously noted, it appears in the specifier of the highest VP shell, VPasp, which already con- tains an overt head (the Perfective aspect marker b-), in violation of the GDCF. In order to surface in a legal configuration, tu must raise out of VP. I assume that it raises into the specifier VP of the covert existential verb. In constructions where more than one wh-indefinite appears, the adjoined wh-indefinite DPs likewise raise together into this position.
Next, the entire QP, including its lexical verbal complement, raises through TP into the specifier of NegP2. (Projections not directly involved in this movement have been omitted for clarity):
stem
V’
￼￼￼V -da’uh
eat
156 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 153.
￼NegP2
Neg’
Neg no who ate dya’
tQP
￼￼QP
￼￼tèe’bag tu bda’uh
TP
T’
T
AgrS
￼￼￼￼AgrSP
gueht tortilla
￼￼AgrS’
AgrOP DP
￼￼￼￼￼￼This movement checks the tense features of the lexical verb (I assume the covert existential shares these tense features) as well as the negative features of tèe’bag.)
As previously argued, tèe’bag appears to surface in PredP (in relative clauses) or FocP (in other contexts). This suggests that the QP headed by tèe’bag, like those headed by a’ti’, raises out of NegP into PredP (where it stays in relative clauses), then to FocP (where it surfaces in other con- texts). As in the cases of negated nonverbal predicates with a’ti’, this movement is not driven by focus features on the negated constituent (since negated indefinites do not receive a focused reading), but by economy and the need to satisfy the Focus Criterion.
Negative Existentials
The negative existential construction differs from the negative indefinite construction in that -dya’ appears after a negated nominal, rather than after the verb. As noted in Section 4.3, this reflects a difference in the scope of negation between the two constructions: in negative existential construc- tions, negation takes scope over the restrictor of the existential quantifica- tion, rather than over the nuclear scope). This construction is superfically parallel to non-verbal a’ti’ negation:
AgrO t
AgrO’
4.5 Existential Negation 157
154. Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap no who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes “No student ate potatoes”
Here, there are a number of parallels with a’ti’ negation of nonverbal constituents: -dya’ surfaces above the verb, suggesting that it is base- generated in a surface position above TP. For instance, compare (154) with (155):
155. A’ti’ me’s-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly neg teacher-dya’ neut-be Mike “Mike is not a teacher”
Also like the a’ti’ negation construction, as previously noted, there are no doubly-filled comp effects with negative existential constructions: -dya’ is obligatory, even when other material precedes tèe’bag. This can be seen in (156) and (157):
156. Tu tèe’bag xi li’ebr-dya’ ny-ùall? who no what book-dya’ subj-read “Who didn’t read any book?”
157. Tu a’ti’ me’s -dya’ n-àa? who neg teacher-dya’ neut-be “Who isn’t a teacher?”
These data suggest that the derivation of non-verbal a’ti’ negation and negative existential constructions are identical. However, I will show that they differ in a few significant ways.
I assume that, as in the negative indefinite construction, tèe’bag is a quantifier that takes as its complement a covert existential predicate, which in turn takes a lexical VP and its arguments as its complement. The wh- indefinite takes the negated lexical NP as its complement. Thus, (154) will originate as the structure in (158):
￼
158 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
158. Tèe’bag tu studya’aann-dya’ b-da’uw pap no who student-dya’ perf-eat potatoes
￼“No student ate potatoes”
QP
Q’
Q tèe’bag
neg
VP
V’
V
E
￼￼￼￼￼￼VPasp
DP
￼V’ b
VPcaus
￼￼V perf.
V’
DPi
pap potato
￼￼￼￼￼tu studya’aann V who student
VP
V -da’uh eat
￼￼V’
￼￼This structure, like the negative existential structure, is monoclausal.
Any non-negated arguments in these structures raise to their respective
agreement projections:
4.5 Existential Negation 159
￼159. AgrOP
￼￼DPi
pap potato
AgrO’ AgrO QP
Q’
Q VP tèe’ bag
V’
V VPasp
V’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼VPcaus
perf. DP ￼ ￼ V’
V b-
￼￼￼tu studya’ aann V who student
ti
VP
V’ V
−da’uh eat
￼￼￼The wh-indefinite and its lexical complement likewise raise out of the lexical VP. Here, however, there is a slight difference from the negative indefinite construction: the tèe’bag complex does not raise through VPasp. This movement is needed for semantic reasons in negative indefinite con- structions (it marks the wh-indefinite as a variable associated with the event denoted by the VP). However, in negative existential constructions, the negated constituent moves into NegP2 independently of the VP in which it is generated, and negation takes scope only over the DP/NP ar- gument, rather than over the event. Thus, it raises directly into the speci- fier of the covert existential VP:
E
160
4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement 160.
￼￼DPi
AgrOP
AgrO’
￼￼￼pap potato
AgrO QP
Q’
Q VP tèe’bag
DPj

￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼ut studya’aann V who student ∃
V’
VPasp
￼V’
￼￼VPcaus b-
V
perf. tj V’
V VP ti
V
da’uh eat
V’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼VPasp, which has tense features that need to be checked, raises into TP, leaving tèe’bag, the negated argument, and the covert existential VP be- hind. This movement also reflects the fact that the lexical VP and the event it represents are not themselves under the scope of negation, and thus does not undergo movement to NegP along with tèe’bag:
4.5 Existential Negation
161
￼161.
TP
T
T’
￼￼VPasp
bda’uh ate
AgrSP
AgrS’
￼￼￼￼￼AgrS
AgrOP
AgrO
￼￼DP
gueht tortilla
AgrO’
￼￼￼QP
Q VP tèe’bag
￼Q’
￼￼￼￼no
who student
V’
t
DP
tu studya’aann VE
￼￼￼The tèe’bag complex then raises into spec, NegP2: 162.
NegP2
QP Neg’
￼￼￼￼tèe’bag tu studya’aann
no who student
Neg dya’
VPasp
bda’uh ate
TP
T’ T
￼￼￼￼￼AgrSP
AgrS’
￼￼￼AgrS
DP
gueht tortilla
AgrOP AgrO’
AgrO
t
￼￼￼￼￼
162 4 Further Consequences of VP-Remnant Movement
The QP then raises out of NegP2 to FocP to satisfy the Focus Criterion and avoid a GDCF violation. (In relative clauses, this movement will target PredP rather than FocP; PredP is omitted from the tree below for clarity):
￼163.
QPi
FOcP
￼￼NegP2
￼￼tèe’bag tu ti studya’aann
no who student
Neg’
￼Neg dya’
TP
￼￼VPa sp T’ bda’uh
ate T
AgrSP
AgrS AgrOP
DP AgrO’
gueht AgrO tortilla
￼￼￼￼AgrS’
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼4.6 Summary
This chapter outlined the syntax and semantics of three of the most com- mon negation constructions in SLQZ: clausal negation with the negative marker cë’ity, constituent negation with the negative marker a’ti’, and in- definite/existential negation with the negative marker tèe’bag. I showed that these superficially similar constructions, upon close examination, show a number of structural differences. These differences reveal the exis- tence of a number of distinct, interacting preverbal functional projections: FocP, PredP, two negative phrases, and two topic positions, which are ordered in the following hierarchy:
t
i
164.
LD topics
TopP1
4.6 Summary 163
￼￼￼FocP
￼￼contrasitvely PredP focused XPs
non-verbal preds.
a-topics NegP1
licenses cë’ity MoodP
modal verbs NegP2
licenses a’ti’ TP and tèe’ bag
￼￼￼TopP2
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼I also showed that the co-occurrence restrictions between several of these projections, as well as the relative rarity of structures with more than one preverbal constituent, can be attributed to the Focus Criterion: the Focus projection must be overtly filled in all SLQZ sentences. When no contrastively focused constituent is present, then either the entire sentence or the highest preverbal constituent is required to raise into FocP.
5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
5.1 Overview
The negation constructions described in the previous chapter revealed ad- ditional information about the contents and ordering of preverbal func- tional projections. In Chapter 4, it was shown that FocP is distinct from the preverbal projection in which nonverbal predicates are licensed, PredP, and that two separate preverbal projections, TopP1 and TopP2, exist for topics.
Wh- and yes/no questions, constructions that both involve the left periphery, reveal evidence for an additional preverbal projection: IntP, a projection directly above FocP in which interrogative elements – wh-words and yes/no question markers – are licensed. This chapter will discuss the syntax and semantics of wh-questions, then the syntax and semantics of yes/no questions.
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection
In the previous chapter, the interaction of wh-movement and negation proved to be a useful diagnostic for the syntactic positions of the three negation markers. In addition, the interaction of a’ti’ negation with wh-questions reveals that syntactic focus movement and wh-movement processes widely believed to involve the same projection and same move- ment across a range of languages (Rizzi 1995 (Italian); Horvath 1986, Kiss 1988, 1994 and Kenesei 1993 (Hungarian); Ouhalla 1997 (Standard Arabic)) – are syntactically distinct operations: as shown in the previous chapter, a’ti’ negation may occur in wh-questions, but not with focus- fronting of other other constituents. I show in this chapter that wh- and focus movement are different operations involving two separate, but inter- acting, projections: FocP and IntP.
166 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
At first glance, SLQZ appears to pattern with other languages with focus movement in this regard. Both target immediately preverbal positions (1-2) and, in most cases, they may not occur simultaneously (3):
1. Gye’eihlly y-tàa’az Li’eb
Mike irr-beat Felipe
“MIKE will beat Felipe/Felipe will beat MIKE”
2. Tu y-tàa’az Li’eb? who irr-beat Felipe
“Who will Felipe beat/Who will beat Felipe?”
3. *Tu Gye’eihlly y-tàa’az?
who Mike irr-beat
“Who will MIKE beat/ who will beat MIKE?”
Focus fronting also blocks long-distance wh-movement, as seen in (4-5):
4. Xi r-ralloh lìu’ [g-a’u Gye’eihlly t ] ? what hab-think-2s.inf irr-eat Mike “What do you think Mike will eat?”
5. *Xi r-ralloh lìu’ [Gye’eihlly g-a’u t ] ? what hab-think-2s.inf Mike irr-eat “What do you think MIKE will eat?”
It also affects the range of interpretations of potentially ambiguous wh- words:
6. X:a mo’od r-ralloh lìu’ [y-zëhnny Gye’eihlly]?
what way hab-think-2s.inf irr-arrive Mike
“How do you think Mike will arrive?”
[“By what form of transportation do you think Mike will arrive?”/ “What makes you think Mike will arrive?”]
These two possible readings correspond to two possible base-generated positions for the wh-phrase “how”. It may either originate inside the em- bedded clause (giving the “what form of transportation” reading), or it may originate inside the matrix clause (giving the “What makes you think” reading).
￼
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 167
When the subject of the embedded clause is focus-fronted, however, this ambiguity disappears:
7. X:a mo’od r-ralloh lìu’ [Gye’eihlly y-zëhnny ]?
what way hab-think 2s.inf Mike irr-arrive
“How do you think MIKE will arrive?”
[* “By what form of transportation do you think Mike will arrive”] [“What makes you think Mike will arrive?”]
In this case, the only available interpretation is that in which the wh- phrase “how” is base-generated in the matrix clause, above the focused embedded clause subject.
If wh-movement and focus movement target the same position, as ar- gued, then the ungrammaticality of (3) and (5), as well as the interpretive contrasts between (6) and (7) can be easily attributed to bounding viola- tions: wh-movement cannot occur past a filled wh-licensing position. Patterns such as these, attested crosslinguistically, support the view that wh- and focus movement target the same position.
The situation, however, is a bit more complex in SLQZ. There are a number of syntactic contexts in SLQZ in which wh-movement is allowed, but focus movement is not. A’ti’ negation is such as case: while a’ti’ nega- tion structures disallow focus-fronted constituents, wh-fronting is allowed. This is seen in the following examples:
8. *Gye’eihlly a’ti’ studya’aann-dya’ n-àa Mike neg student-dya’ neut-be “MIKE isn’t a student”
9. Tu a’ti’ studya’aann-dya’ n-àa? who neg student-dya’ neut-be “Who isn’t a student?”
An additional piece of evidence for separate landing positions for wh- and focus movement comes from the distribution of preverbal constituents in sentences whose verbs are marked with the Definite aspect. The Defi- nite aspect, as noted in Chapter 1, is primarily used to express future events that the speaker feels sure will occur: thus, future events expressed with the Definite aspect have more emphatic assertive force that those ex- pressed with the Irrealis aspect, the other aspect used to express future events:
￼
168 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
10. Y-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr irr-sell Mike car “Mike will sell the car”
11. S-tòo’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr
def-sell Mike car
“Mike will definitely sell the car”
Future sentences with Definite-marked verbs also disallow preverbal (focused) arguments:
12. *Gye’eihlly s-tòo’oh ca’rr
Mike def-sell car
“MIKE will definitely sell the car”
Wh-words, however, may appear before Definite-marked verbs:
13. Tu s-tòo’oh ca’rr? who def-sell car
“Who will definitely sell the car?”
In Lee 2005, I argued that TPs containing Definite verbs obligatorily raise through MoodP to Focus: the focus readings thus given to Definite- marked TPs contribute to their characteristically strong assertive force. The fact that TP must raise to spec, FocP in sentences with Definite- marked verbs would account for the ban on focused arguments: since FocP is filled, there would be no place for them to land.
If wh-words and focused constituents were licensed in the same posi- tion, then the cooccurrence of preverbal wh-words and Definite-marked verbs is unexplainable: assuming that Definite-marked TPs surface in FocP themselves, then there should be no possible landing spot for fronted wh-words. Thus, the only option is to posit separate positions for focused constituents and wh-words.
5.2.1 The Interaction of Focus and Wh: Reasons for Co-occurrence Restrictions
I will thus assume that wh-features and focus features are indeed licensed in separate projections. If wh-words and focus surface in different posi- tions, however, any operations involved in wh-movement must be able to account for both the co-occurrence restrictions between wh-movement and
￼
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 169
focus-fronting (described in the previous chapter), as well as the lack of these restrictions in focus negation contexts.
The possibility that I will propose is that wh-questions have both [+Q] features and [+foc] features: that is, wh-expressions must pass through both FocP and an interrogative position (IntP) in order to have their fea- tures checked (irrelevant projections are omitted in the tree below):
14.
IntP
DP FocP
TP t
....
If FocP is filled, then wh-expressions may not appear, since there is no longer any way for them to have their focus features checked:
15.
IntP
DP FocP
*
wh
3
Conversely, if wh-expressions (apart from “why” and wide-scope “how”) appear, they must pass through FocP themselves. Since spec, FocP contains the wh-trace, it is unavailable for other constituents. The possibil- ity of focused constituents with “why” and wide-scope “how” results from a difference in semantic function between these elements and other wh-expressions.
This possibility is supported by both semantic and crosslinguistic typo- logical considerations. Both types of evidence will be discussed below.
Semantic evidence for the necessity of focus movement in wh-questions comes from the overlapping semantic functions of wh-expressions and contrastively focused constituents: both serve to single out members of sets that fulfill a particular role. Rooth (1985) defines focus as selecting an individual out of a set of possible candidates that have a particular quality. Likewise, standard wh-questions ask listeners to identify an individual
￼￼￼￼wh
￼￼￼￼￼￼XP TP
....
￼
170 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
out of a set of candidates that have certain qualities. (Similar semantic par- allels between contrastive focus and wh- constructions have been noted by Horvath 1986, among others.) The main semantic difference between con- trastive focus constructions and wh-questions is that the former identify an individual out of the set of candidates, while the latter assume that such an individual exists, and ask listeners to identify it. I will assume that this dif- ference is reflected in the syntax in the following way: when a referential expression (such as a proper name) moves into FocP, the entity denoted by the expression is identified as the unique member of a set of possible can- didates having a certain quality. Wh-expressions, however, are non- referential. When a wh-word raises into focus, it simply serves to assert the existence of an individual within a set of candidates, but does not specifi- cally identify this individual. When the wh-word raises out of focus into the wh-projection, it is thus interpreted as questioning the identity of the focused element.
Suggestive evidence for two separate, interacting projections for wh and focus comes from the typology of wh-questions and focus constructions crosslinguistically: languages vary in whether they form wh-questions and focus constructions through overt syntactic movement (as SLQZ does) or by leaving wh-words and focused constituents in situ. Kenesei (1993) out- lines the following typology of movement strategies for wh-questions and focus constructions:
￼￼WH-movement
Focus movement
￼Chinese, Japanese, etc. English, etc. Hungarian, etc.
- - + - + +
￼Table 1. Typology of wh- and focus movement strategies (from Kenesei 1993, p. 31).
SLQZ clearly falls into the same grouping as languages such as Hungar- ian. Conspicuously absent from this list, however, are languages with overt focus movement but without overt wh-movement:
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 171
WH-movement Focus movement ??- +
Table 2. Unattested wh- and focus movement configuration.
It appears, then, that such languages are unattested. If the licensing po- sition for wh-words is distinct from, and above, FocP, this typological gap can be accounted for by reasons of economy: focus-movement can only occur overtly when wh-movement does. This is seen in languages such as English, in which overt wh-movement is required, but focus is realized in situ: overt movement through focus is only required by wh-expressions, which have to move in any case to reach IntP. When wh-features are strong (that is, if they must be checked by overt movement, per Chomsky 1992, 1995), focus features may also be strong; thus both can be satisfied overtly. This is the case in languages such as Hungarian and SLQZ. When wh-features are weak (that is, if their features can be checked without overt movement), focus features are also weak: both are satisfied covertly at LF. This is the case with languages such as Chinese.
The hypothetical language that requires overt focus movement but has wh-in-situ, however, can be ruled out by the proposal that focus is licensed in a projection below the interrogative projection. If it is the case that wh-expressions must check some of their features by movement through Focus, then a language that requires overt focus movement would also re- quire wh-expressions to raise overtly into FocusP (irrelevant projections omitted below):
16.
IntP
FocP DP TP
...t...
Thus, languages with overt focus movement also force overt movement of wh-expressions, and wh-expressions are thus blocked from appearing in their base-generated positions. If it is indeed the case (as Kenesei’s data imply) that no language requires overt movement for expression of focus
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼wh
￼￼
172 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
but allows wh-in-situ, it provides strong suggestive evidence for distinct projections for wh-licensing and focus licensing. Positing a single projec- tion (and a single set of semantic and morphological features) for wh- words and focused expressions would fail to account for the possible range of wh- and focus movement configurations crosslinguistically. Although assuming a single wh/focus projection would correctly rule out languages with wh-in-situ and overt focus movement (if wh-movement and focus movement are the same process, there should not be any differences in their distribution), it would also wrongly rule out languages such as Eng- lish, with overt wh-movement and covert focus movement. Positing separate, interacting projections for wh-expressions and focus correctly predicts the possibility of languages such as English, while ruling out the unattested possibility of languages with overt focus movement and only wh-in-situ.
5.2.2 The Syntax of Wh-Questions in SLQZ
This interaction between FocP and IntP is instantiated in the syntax in the following way: in non-negated wh-questions, TP (the domain in which most wh-words are generated) raises into focus itself, fulfilling the Focus Criterion and blocking the raising of other constituents into this position (non-relevant projections omitted for clarity):
17.
IntP
DP Int’
Int FocP
TP Foc’
Foc NegP
Neg’ Neg t
Since the raised TP contains either the base-generated wh-word or wh- trace (in the case of argument wh-questions and VP-modifying adverbial wh-questions), movement of the TP into FocP satisfies the need for wh- words to have features checked in FocP.
￼￼￼￼wh
￼￼￼￼￼￼
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 173
Movement of TP into FocP is independently suggested by Rizzi’s (1995) observation that in Italian, an SVO language, focused constituents may be fronted to pre-subject position, but wh-expressions may not appear directly before subjects:
18. QUESTO Gianni ti dirà (non quello che pensavi)
THIS Gianni to-you will-say (not that which you-thought) “Gianni will say THIS to you” (not what you thought
(he would say))
19. *Che cosa Gianni ti dirà?
what thing Gianni to-you will-say
“What will Gianni say to you?” (examples from Rizzi 1995, p.16)
Rizzi attributes this asymmetry not to a difference in position between IntP and FocP (which he argues to be a single projection) but to the re- quirement that wh-licensing requires that both the head and specifier of the licensing position (FocP, in his view) be filled. This requirement is motivated by the assumption that, since wh-features of matrix clause wh-questions are generated inside TP (e.g., by constituents base-generated inside TP), these features must somehow be moved into the projection in which wh-features are checked. Thus, when wh-movement occurs in a matrix clause, verbs move obligatorily from the head of TP to the head of FocP (by I-C movement, in older terms).
Rizzi’s hypothesis accounts for the obligatory subject-auxiliary inver- sion in object wh-questions in English, for example, as well as the un- grammaticality of the Italian construction in (19):
20. What did Mike buy?
21. *What Mike did buy?
Rizzi’s analysis can also be updated to account for the fact that TP, not an inflectional head, raises in wh-questions in SLQZ. Specifically, since the TP raises to the specifier of a projection distinct from the wh-licensing position, spec-head agreement can no longer be considered the motivating factor for movement. (This is particularly true if the Generalized Doubly Filled Comp Filter is assumed to be operative.) Additionally, we need to (1) motivate TP-raising to FocP and (2) justify wh-movement out of the filled specifier of FocP.
Motivation for both TP-raising and wh-movement out of TP is provided by both the Focus Criterion and the need for wh-expressions to check both
￼
174 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
[+Q] and [+foc] features, as previously proposed. Argument wh- expressions (as well as adjunct wh-expressions expressing manner/time) are generated inside TP. Thus, TP-raising to FocP moves the TP (where wh- and focus features are generated) into the domain in which these fea- tures can be checked. This is consistent with Rizzi’s (1995) analysis, outlined above, for the motivation of I-to-C movement in Italian wh-questions. I will assume that the wh-expression remains inside TP until the TP has raised to FocP, then raises out to IntP.
5.2.3 Wh-Questions that Allow Focus: A Case of Wh-in-Situ
The preceding account also explains why xi ni’ih “why” and the wide- scope reading of x:a mo’od “how” differ from other wh-expressions in al- lowing focused constituents to appear between them and the verb, as seen in (22) and (23):
22. Xi ni’ih Gye’eihlly b-tàa’z Li’eb? what reason Mike perf-beat Felipe “Why did MIKE beat Felipe?”
23. X:a mo’od Gye’eihlly y-zëinny Ldùu’ah
what way Mike irr-arrive Oaxaca
“How can it be that MIKE will arrive in Oaxaca?”
“Why” and “how” (with a wide-scope reading) differ from other wh- words semantically in that they question an entire event, not just its par- ticipants or the manner of the action involved. For this reason, they have traditionally been assumed to be generated as adjuncts to the entire clause, rather than generated inside VP. Because why and (on certain readings) how (crosslinguistically) take scope over the proposition expressed by the entire clause, rather than questioning a part of the proposition, I will argue that they are base-generated in IntP.
Assuming this to be correct, then TP-raising to FocP in xi ni’ih and wide-scope x:a mo’od questions is not necessary for the licensing of these wh-words: since xi ni’ih and x:a mo’od are generated outside TP, there are no focus or wh-features inside TP that need to be checked by TP- raising to FocP. Thus, TPs in questions with xi ni’ih and x:a mo’od do not need to raise to FocP for wh-features to be checked, and FocP can be filled by other constituents. (I will assume, however, that when no focus-fronted constituents appear in xi ni’ih and x:a mo’od questions, TP does raise into FocP in order to satisfy the Focus Criterion.)
￼
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 175
If xi ni’ih, “why” and wide-scope x:a mo’od, “how” are generated in Spec, IntP, this would mean that they do not pass through FocP, and thus differ from other wh-words in that they do not have focus features that need to be checked. Motivation for this possibility comes from the fact that “why” and “how” differ semantically from other wh-words in that they question manners, reasons, and amounts, rather than individuals. Szabolcsi and Zwarts (1993) argue that while possible answers to wh-questions with “what” and “who” are members of unordered sets of individuals, possible answers to questions with “how” and “why” are members of ordered sets.
Szabolcsi and Zwarts show that this difference is realized in natural lan- guage by the contrast in possible felicitous answers to questions with what/who and how. First, consider a simple question with “what”:
24. What did everyone read?
If the person answering the question knew that there were three people in the contextually relevant group “everyone”, and also knew that each of them read three books, he or she could answer the question one of two ways, depending on whether “everyone” is interpreted as scoping over “what”. If “everyone” takes wide scope (“for every person, what did he/she read?”) the question can be answered with a list of every book that every person read (that is, nine books). If “what” takes wide scope (“what thing is such that everyone read it?”) then the question must be answered with only the name of the book or books that were on everyone’s reading list. In short, to correctly answer the question on this second reading, the speaker must compute the intersection of the reading lists of all three people, then pick out and identify the individual item or items in this intersection.
This can be contrasted with the possible answers to a question with “how”:
25. How did everyone behave?
Szabolcsi and Zwarts present the following context for this question: the listener answering the question knows that Bill behaved rudely and stupidly, Mary behaved loudly and stupidly, and John behaved nicely and stupidly. In this case, in contrast to (24) above, they argue that the only felicitous answer to the question is the sum of everyone’s behavior: the speaker cannot answer the question simply by saying “Stupidly”. In short, manners form collective groups that cannot be broken up by the formation of intersections, as can groups of individuals.
￼
176 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
In short, allowable “how” and “why” questions differ from other wh-questions in that they do not ask the listener to pick out an individual member of a presupposed set, but to identify a collective group of behaviors.
This difference can be directly linked to the different roles Focus plays in the formation of “how” and “why” questions and other wh-questions in SLQZ. Recall that constituents raised into FocP are identified as uniquely selected members of sets of possible candidates. Thus, focused constitu- ents are individuals that can be picked out of groups. If Szabolcsi and Zwarts are correct, then manners and reasons (among other things that “how” and “why” normally represent) cannot be individual members of sets, and thus cannot be identified as such by being moved into FocP. Thus, there is no motivation for “how” and “why” to raise through FocP in SLQZ.
5.2.4 Another Possible Account
In the preceding sections, I have argued that wh-words and focused- fronted words occupy separate, but interacting projections in SLQZ. This proposal was motivated by the existence of syntactic constructions (a’ti’ negation and future sentences with Definite-marked verbs) in which focus movement in blocked, but wh-movement is allowed. These constructions suggested that wh-words occupy a distinct projection above FocP. The ap- parent cooccurrence restrictions between focused elements and wh-words results from the movement of TP into FocP in wh-questions. Adjunct wh- words with wide-scope readings (such as why and wide-scope how) have no focus features and are generated in spec, IntP; thus, they allow other elements to appear preverbally in FocP.
This difference in behavior between “why” and other wh-words has also been noted in other languages with syntactic focus movement, such as Hungarian. Kiss (1994) notes that in Hungarian, miért “why” is the only wh-word that may co-occur with focused constituents:
26. Miért MARI-t küldte el János a boltba? why Mary-acc sent away John the shop-to “Why is it MARY who sent John to the shop?”
(Hungarian: Kiss 1994, p. 37)
Kiss proposes that in this case, “why” adjoins to a position above FocP, which she argues to be the normal landing position for wh-words.
There is reason to believe, however, this would not work for SLQZ. Evidence against placing “why” (and “how” ) in higher surface positions
￼
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 177
than other wh-words in SLQZ comes from their behavior in left-dislocated topic constructions. Left-dislocated topics are the only nominals that may appear before wh-words in SLQZ:
27. Gye’eihlly-àa’ tu gw-àa’zy Gye’eihlly? Mike-top who perf-hit Mike “What about Mike, who did he hit?”
Furthermore, no material may intervene between topicalized arguments and wh-words in SLQZ. While certain temporal adverbials may be base- generated above wh-words (28), they may not appear between a topical- ized argument and wh-word (29):
28. Nài xi b-guhty Gye’eihlly? yesterday what perf-kill Mike “Yesterday, what did Mike kill?”
29. *Gye’eihlly nài xi b-guhty Gye’eihlly?
Mike yesterday what perf-kill Mike “As for Mike, yesterday, what did he kill?”
This suggests that there are no possible landing positions (and thus, no additional projections) between TopP and IntP.
If it were the case that “why” and wide-scope “how” surfaced higher than other wh-words, one would expect that they would be blocked from appearing with topicalized arguments, since TopP is the only remaining projection above IntP. This however, proves not to be the case:
30. Li’eb-àa’ xi ni’ih gw-àa’z-ëng Gye’eihlly Felipe-top what reason perf-hit-3s.prox Mike “What about Felipe, why did he hit Mike?”
The fact that all wh-words, regardless of their semantic scope or ability to cooccur with focused constituents, may appear after fronted topics thus suggests that all wh-words surface in the same position in SLQZ.
Furthermore, the interpretive constraints on Hungarian “why” questions with focus suggest that my analysis is amenable to the Hungarian data as well.
Kiss notes that “why” in questions with focused constituents is more constrained in its possible interpretation than it is in other contexts.
￼
178 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
Normally, Kiss notes, miért “why” may have the reading “what for” in questions:
31. Miért küldte el János Mari-t a boltba? why sent away John Mary-acc the shop-to “Why did John send Mary to the shop?” (Hungarian: Kiss 1994, p. 37)
This question may be felicitously answered with a reason (“Because Mary was hungry”) or with the item John wanted Mary to buy (“For bread”).
In the question with “Mary” in focus, however, the second answer is impossible. The question may only be answered with the reason for Mary sending John to the shop:
32. Miért MARI-t küldte el János a boltba?
why Mary-acc sent away John the shop-to “Why is it MARY who sent John to the shop?” (Hungarian: Kiss 1994, p. 37)
A. Mert Mari éhes volt. because Mary hungry was “Because Mary was hungry”
A. *Kenyér-ért. bread-for
“For bread”
This absence of the “what for” reading of “why” in questions with overt focus—and its possibility in “why” questions without focus—can be corre- lated to the presence or absence of [+foc] features on “why”. Recall that the focus feature on wh-words forces wh-words to select an individual out of a set of possible candidates. Certain kinds of questions (such as those involving reasons and manners), however, cannot have individual elements of sets as answers, only collectives of ordered sets.
The “for what reason” reading of “why” clearly falls into the latter group: on the “for what reason” reading, a question such as “Why did eve- ryone leave?”, for instance, can only be felicitously answered with a com- plete inventory of reasons why all the people involved left: if five people abruptly left a party, for example, the above question couldn’t be answered with simply the reason why one of the people left. Because the “for what
￼
5.2 Wh- and Focus Are Not the Same Projection 179
reason” reading of “why” does not involve selecting an individual out of a group, it does not involve focus.
The “what for” reading, on the other hand, does involve selection of an individual (the thing desired in (31)) out of a group of possibilities. Thus, it is compatible with the function of Focus, and “why” in questions such as (31) (with the “what for” reading) must contain [+foc] features itself.
5.2.5 Two Problem Cases: Narrow-Scope “How” and Focus Negation
This leaves two cases still unaccounted for: why “how” on its manner in- terpretation still shows co-occurrence restrictions with focused constitu- ents, and why a’ti’ negation allows wh-extractions. Below, I will address each of these cases in turn.
Narrow-Scope “How”
X:a mo’od “how” on its manner interpretation is still sensitive to the presence of other focused constituents, as seen in (33), repeated from above:
33. X:a mo’od r-ralloh lìu’ [Gye’eihlly yzëhnny ]? what way hab-think 2s.inf Mike irr-arrive “How do you think MIKE will arrive?”
[e.g., “What makes you think MIKE will arrive?”/ *”By what form of transportation do you think
MIKE will arrive?”]
The main difference here is that x:a mo’od questions not an entire proposition, but only the manner in which an event is to take place. On its manner interpretation then, x:a mo’od is most likely generated within VP, which represents the action being questioned.
I will assume that in this case, x:a mo’od raises up through the matrix TP along with the VP in which it is generated. Once the xa mood-VP com- plex has raised into spec, TP, one of two possible movements may take place: either the entire TP, containing the x:a mo’od-VP complex, raises up into IntP (perhaps through FocP) or the TP raises into FocP before x:a mo’od raises itself in IntP. Movement through FocP in either of these cases may be motivated by the Focus Criterion.
￼￼
180 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
Wh-Extraction out of a’ti’ Constructions
The final matter that needs to be accounted for is why wh-questions can
co-occur with a’ti’ negation, as seen in (34):
34. Tu a’ti’ studya’aann-dya’ n-àa? who neg student-dya’ neut-be “Who isn’t a student?”
This is all the more surprising since negation is known to create, rather than erase, barriers to wh-movement and other A’-movement (Rizzi 1990, Szabolcsi and Zwarts 1993). In Rizzi’s terms, the common inability of wh-words to move across negation in a number of languages can be con- sidered a result of Relativized Minimality: an A’ specifier, such as a wh-word, cannot raise past an intervening A’ specifier, such as an operator in the specifier of NegP.1 Rizzi argued that this requirement is motivated by the need for wh-traces to be properly governed by their antecedents: if a wh-word A raised past another wh-word B, then the trace of A would be wrongly governed by B, which would be closer potential governor than A:
35. * wh-A ......wh-B.....tA
This accounts for well-known superiority effects, such as the ungram- maticality of questions such as *What did who see?
Rizzi argues that any A’ constituent, such as a negative operator, that in- tervenes between a wh-word and its trace would result in a grammaticality violation. On the other hand, wh-movement past specifiers in A-positions (such as subjects) is allowed, since A-constituents aren’t potential governors for A’-traces. Thus, while *what did who see? is ungrammati- cal, what did Bill see? is fully acceptable.
However, as seen by the SLQZ data, it is precisely the illicit configuration that appears to be allowed (wh-movement past a’ti’ nega- tion), while wh-movement past an A-constituent (a fronted nonverbal predicate) is disallowed.
The solution I will assume is that wh-words themselves adjoin to a’ti’ and thus, along with a’ti’ and the constituent it negates, raise to spec, FocP:
1 Recall from the previous chapter, however, that in SLQZ NegP2 can also behave like a derived A-position when a constituent undergoing A-movement moves into it.
￼￼
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 181
￼36.
DP wh
Focp
￼Qp
Foc’
Foc PredP
...tWH
￼￼Q’
Q a’ti’
￼￼￼Since specifiers of specifiers (such as the wh-word adjoined to a’ti’, which itself is the specifier of a larger QP taking the negated constituent as its complement) may c-command constituents outside the projections they are specifiers of, wh-words adjoined to a’ti’ can govern their traces.
From Spec, QP, the wh-word then raises to spec, IntP to check its inter- rogative features and avoid a GDFC violation.
Thus, the A’ status of a’ti’ actually facilitates extraction of wh-words because it allows wh-words to pied-pipe with a’ti’ to spec, FocP.
Predicate nominals disallow wh-words from adjoining to them and raising with them into FocP: because wh-words are A’–constituents, they cannot land in intermediate A positions such as PredP without forming improper chains. Thus, they cannot raise through PredP to FocP along with nonverbal predicates.
Subsequent movement of nonverbal predicates from PredP to FocP to satisfy the Focus Criterion, however, also prevents wh-words from raising independently past fronted nonverbal predicates into IntP. Because FocP is already filled with the fronted predicate, the wh-word cannot pass through FocP itself to have its focus features checked, and wh-movement is thus blocked.
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions
SLQZ forms yes/no questions by marking a sentence with one of three distinct question markers: laàa’, and uu, which appear question-initially; and èee, which appears question-finally. Only one of these markers may appear per question, as seen in the following examples:
182 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
37. B-da’uh Gye’eihlly gueht èee? perf-eat Mike tortilla Q “Did Mike eat tortillas?”
38. Laàa’ b-da’uh Gye’eihlly gueht?
Q perf-eat Mike tortilla “Did Mike eat tortillas?”
39. Uu b-da’uh Gye’eihlly gueht? Q perf-eat Mike tortilla “Did Mike eat tortillas?”
While the same English translation may be used felicitously for all three of the preceding examples, these three markers differ both in their syntac- tic and semantic distribution: the marker uu can only be used in questions for which the speaker expects or wants a positive answer; the marker laàa’ may only be used to question a proposition introduced into the discourse by the question itself (that is, it may only question new information); and the marker èee may only be used to question previously introduced infor- mation or presupposed information. In the following sections, I will de- scribe the syntactic differences among questions formed with the different markers, then differences in their usage, and finally, the correlation be- tween their syntactic and semantic features.
5.3.1 Syntactic Differences Among the Question Markers Constraints on uu Questions
Questions formed with the marker uu (a typical example is given in (40)) are subject to the largest number of syntactic constraints of the yes/no questions. Uu may not be used in questions containing preverbal topics or focused constituents (41-42), nor may it be used in negative yes/no ques- tions (43):
40. Uu b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly? Q perf-dance Mike
“Did Mike dance?”
￼
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 183
41. * Uu a Gye’eihlly b-gya’a’? Q top Mike perf-dance
“Did Mike dance?”
42. * Uu Gye’eihlly b-gya’a’? Q Mike perf-dance
“Did MIKE dance?”
43. *Uu cë’ity b-gyàa’-dya’ Gye’eihlly? Q neg perf-dance-dya’ Mike
“Didn’t Mike dance?”
Questions with uu may contain postverbal, but not preverbal, predicate nominals:
44. Uu n-àa Gye’eihlly do’ctoor? Q neut-be Mike doctor
“Is Mike a doctor?”
45. *Uu do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly? Q doctor neut-be Mike
Questions about future events may appear with Definite-marked verbs, but not Irrealis-marked verbs, in uu questions. (The Definite aspect is used to express emphatic speaker belief that a future event will take place; the Irrealis aspect, more commonly used, does not):
46. Uu s-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr? Q def-sell Mike car “Will Mike sell the car?”
47. *Uu y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr Q irr-sell Mike car
“Will Mike sell the car?”
Constraints on laàa’ Questions
Questions formed with the question marker laàa’
pears in (48)) show fewer syntactic constraints that those with uu. While, like uu questions, they can’t appear with topics (49), unlike uu questions,
￼(a typical example ap-
184 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
they may appear with focus-fronted constituents (50) and in negative ques- tions (51):

48. Laàa’ b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly? Q perf-dance Mike
“Did Mike dance?”
49. *Laàa’ a Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah ? Q top Mike perf-dance “Did Mike dance?”
50. Laàa’ Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah ? Q Mike perf-dance
“Did MIKE dance?”
51. Laàa’ cë’ity b-gyàa’-(dya’) Gye’eihlly? Q neg perf-dance-(dya’) Mike
“Didn’t Mike dance?”
They may also appear with preverbal, as well as postverbal predicate nominals:
52. Laàa’ do’ctoor nàa Gye’eihlly? Q doctor neut-be Mike
“Is Mike a doctor?”
The fact that the question marker laàa may co-occur with focus-fronted constituents (as seen in (50) further supports the existence of separate pro- jections for interrrogative and focused constituents.
Unlike uu, they may form future questions with either Irrealis or Defi- nite-marked verbs:

53. Laàa’ s-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr? Q def-sell Mike car “Will Mike sell the car?”
54. Laàa’ y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr Q irr-sell Mike car
“Will Mike sell the car?”
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 185 This contrast will be shown to be directly correlated to the differing se-
mantics of uu and laàa questions. Constraints on èee Questions
Questions formed with the marker èee show the fewest syntactic con- straints of the three question types. They can appear with topics (55), focus (56), negation (57), and preverbal and postverbal predicate nominals (58):
55. A Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah èee? top Mike perf-dance Q
“Did Mike dance?”
56. Gye’eihlly b-gyàa’ah èee? Mike perf-dance Q
“Did MIKE dance?”
57. Cë’ity b-gyàa’-(dya’) Gye’eihlly èee?
neg perf-dance-(dya’) Mike Q “Didn’t Mike dance?”
58. Do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly èee? doctor neut-be Mike Q
“Is Mike a doctor?”
Like laàa’ questions, they can appear with either Irrealis or Definite marked verbs in future questions:
59. S-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr èee? def-sell Mike car Q
“Will Mike sell the car?”
60. Y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr èee? irr-sell Mike car Q
“Will Mike sell the car?”
The structural differences among questions with the three different markers can be summed up as follows:
￼
186 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
￼￼￼￼Topics
Focused arguments Negation
Preverbal predicate nominals/ adjectives
Aspects with future
uu
no no no no
laàa’ èee
no yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
Definite only
Table 3. Cooccurence restrictions with yes/no question markers.
Definite or Irrealis Definite or Irrealis
￼￼5.3.2 Contexts for the Three Question Markers
Questions formed with the three markers differ in usage, as well as struc- ture. These differences concern the status of the information being ques- tioned or speaker presupposition about possible answers to the question.
Existential Questions
Questions involving existential constructions clearly show the contrasting usages of the three question markers. This can be seen in the following examples, which differ from each other only in the choice of question marker:
61. Uu n-u’uh tu ø-zuu loongdèe? Q neut-exist who neut-stand outside “Is anyone outside?”
62. Laàa’ n-u’uh tu ø-zuu loongdèe? Q neut-exist who neut-stand outside
“Is anyone outside?”
63. N-u’uh tu ø-zuu loongdèe èee? neut-exist who neut-stand outside Q “Is anyone outside?”
These three questions may not be used interchangeably in SLQZ. Rod- rigo Garcia, one of my SLQZ consultants, gives the following hypothetical scenarios in which each of these may be used:
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 187
The question with uu would be used in the following context: Someone who is carrying a large load out of a store and expecting someone to be available to help him or her would pose the question with uu. This sug- gests that the question marker uu would be used in cases in which the speaker posing the question fully expects someone to be outside.
A possible context for laàa’ would be as follows: The speaker posing the question is robbing a house, and wants to make sure he or she can escape undetected. The speaker would then pose the question with laàa’ to his or her accomplice. (Garcia notes that the question marker uu could not be used in this context.) The question marker laàa’ is thus being used to raise the possibility that someone might be outside.
Finally, the question with èee would be used in this situation: The speaker and an accomplice are robbing a house, and as they are about to leave, the accomplice says “Don’t go outside!”. The speaker would then pose the question with èee . Garcia notes that neither laàa’ nor uu may be used to pose the question in this context.
The Uses of laàa’ and èee
While uu questions are clearly distinct from the other two types of ques- tions in both structure and usage, the difference between the contexts for laàa’ and èee is subtle. The only obvious difference is that in the laàa’ question, the speaker poses the question without direct prompting, and in the èee question, the speaker poses the question in direct response to someone else’s comments.
This distinction holds in other questions as well, as the following exam- ples show:
64. Laàa’ n-u’uh tu do’ctoor n-u’uh rèe?
Q neut-exist who doctor neut-exist here “Are there any doctors here?”
65. N-u’uh tu do’ctoor n-u’uh rèe èee? eut-exist who doctor neut-exist here Q “Are there any doctors here?”
Garcia offers the following context for the laàa’ question: while walk- ing down the street, the speaker sees someone being injured in an accident. He or she then goes from building to building, asking if there are any doc- tors available.
He offers a contrasting context for the èee question: the speaker wit- nesses an accident, and another bystander tells him or her to go to a nearby
￼
188 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
building to find a doctor. The speaker could then use the question with èee to ask the other bystander to confirm that there are indeed doctors in that particular building. In this case, the question cannot be posed with laàa’ .
The distinction between (62) and (63) is similar to that between (64) and (65): the question with laàa’ is posed without input from other speakers, while the question with èee is posed in response to information provided to the speaker. This suggests that the choice between èee or laàa’ depends on the information structure of the question: while questions with laàa’ appear to be used to simultaneously introduce a proposition into the dis- course and question it, questions with èee are only used to question pre- viously introduced or presupposed information. In short, laàa’ is used to question new information, while èee is used to question old information.
More Evidence: Negative Questions
This generalization is confirmed in the contrasting contexts for negative yes/no question with laàa’ and èee :
66. Laàa’ a’ti do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly? Q neg doctor neut-be Mike
“Isn’t Mike a doctor?”
67. A’ti do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly èee? neg doctor neut-be Mike Q
“Isn’t Mike a doctor?”
Garcia offers this context for the laàa’ question: Mike is sick, and the speaker wants to try to cure him with a potentially dangerous experimental medicine. First, however, the speaker wants to make sure Mike is not a doctor so that he won’t be aware of what is being done to him.
Here, then, the speaker is simultaneously raising the possibility that Mike isn’t a doctor and asking that this be confirmed or denied. The ques- tion marker èee could not be used to form the question in this context.
A felicitous context for the èee question is as follows: The speaker last saw Mike several years earlier, when Mike was in medical school. Now, a mutual acquaintance tells the speaker that Mike is now a lawyer. Here, the speaker would use the question with èee to confirm this newly received information: rather than raising the possibility that Mike isn’t a doctor, the speaker is questioning someone else’s assertion that Mike is not a doctor.
These contexts are thus consistent with the earlier generalization: laàa introduces and questions new information, while èee questions old infor- mation.
￼
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 189
Another contrast between (66) and (67) is a difference in the scope of negation: (66), the question with laàa’ , can be more appropriately glossed “Is Mike not a doctor?”
A similar contrast appears in another pair of negative examples:
68. Laàa’ a’ti nnsini’cy n-àa Gye’eihlly? Q neg intelligent neut-be Mike “Isn’t Mike intelligent?”
69. A’ti nnsini’cy n-àa Gye’eihlly èee? neg intelligent neut-be Mike Q “Isn’t Mike intelligent?”
The laàa’ question would be used in a context such as this: The speaker wants to play a trick on Mike, and is trying to make sure Mike isn’t smart enough to catch on.
As in the previous set of examples, the laàa’ question simultaneously raises the possibility that Mike isn’t intelligent and questions it.
A possible context for the èee question would be the following: The speaker found out that Mike had unexpectedly failed an easy test at school. The speaker, who had previously assumed that Mike was intelligent, is now questioning the possibility (raised by the news of Mike’s flunking the test) that Mike is not intelligent. Garcia notes that the question with laàa’ cannot be used here.
There are also contexts in which a question may be felicitously poised with laàa’, but not èee. Garcia volunteers the following context; You are walking down the street with a friend and pass by an interesting-looking restaurant. You then ask your friend if he or she is hungry. In this context, “are you hungry?” can only be asked with laàa’:
70. Laàa’ r-dyaàa’n-u’?
Q hab-be.hungry-2s.inf “Are you hungry?”
71. #R-dyaàa’n-u’ èee? hab-be.hungry-2s.inf Q “Are you hungry?”
Garcia volunteers that the question with èee, while not allowed in the context above, would be used if your friend said he/she wanted to eat something before you asked the question.
￼
190 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
Pamela Munro (p.c.) suggests that etiquette concerns may be another factor contributing to the pragmatic contrast between (70) and (71): posing the question with laàa’ may be interpreted as merely making an indirect suggestion, while posing the question with èee may be construed as pushy or presumptuous (rather like an English speaker in the same context saying “You’re hungry, right?”). This idea, if correct, however, further supports the idea that laàa’ and èee are distinguished by the status of the informa- tion they question: questioning the possibility that a friend might be hun- gry is less forceful that questioning a preformed assumption that he or she is hungry.
Some Ambiguous Cases
It must be noted, however, that the propositions questioned in èee ques- tions are not necessarily explicitly introduced before the question is asked. In the negative cases above, for instance, no one explicitly tells the speaker that Mike is not a doctor or that Mike is not intelligent. Rather, these facts are inferred from other propositions: the fact that Mike is a lawyer and the fact that Mike flunked an easy test. Thus, propositions questioned in èee questions may be (technically) new information in that the speaker is the first one to introduce it directly into the discourse, but they must be propo- sitions that can be inferred or presupposed from previously introduced information.
Thus, the line between contexts for èee and laàa’ questions is poten- tially blurry. Indeed, there are contexts that may legitimately trigger ques- tions with either èee or laàa’.
One such context is the following: You are walking down the street with someone and you see Mike wearing a white coat and a stethoscope around his neck. You ask your companion “Is Mike a doctor?” Garcia notes that the question can be posed in either of the following ways:
72. Laàa’ do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly? Q doctor neut-be Mike “Is Mike a doctor?”
73. Do’ctoor n-àa Gye’eihlly èee? doctor neut-be Mike Q
“Is Mike a doctor?”
Another potentially ambiguous context is this: You haven’t seen Mike in a week. He then appears looking thinner and paler than before. You ask
￼
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 191
a mutual friend who’s with you, “Has Mike been sick?”. In this context, the question may be posed with either laàa’ or èee :

74. Laàa’ r-a’cxùu Gye’eihlly? Q hab-be.sick Mike “Has Mike been sick?”
75. R-a’cxùu Gye’eihlly èee? hab-be.sick Mike Q
“Has Mike been sick?”
These contexts meet the criteria previously established for both laàa’ and èee questions. Like other laàa’ questions, the questions in the con- texts above both introduce a proposition and question its truth. Like èee questions, however, the questions introduce propositions that can be in- ferred by both speakers and hearers through real-world knowledge.
Contexts for uu Questions
Now I return to the third question marker, uu. Questions with uu are used when the speaker either expects or wants a positive answer. They cannot be used with negative questions, as previously seen:
76. *Uu a’ti’ do’ctoor-dya’ n-àa Gye’eihlly? Q NEG doctor-dya’ neut-be Mike
“Isn’t Mike a doctor?”
They are generally used when the speaker wants to confirm a proposi- tion he or she believes to be true. An example of this appears in (77), repeated from above:
77. Uu n-u’uh tu ø-zuu loongdèe?
Q neut-exist who neut-stand outside “Is anyone outside?”
As previously noted, this question would be asked in a situation in which the speaker fully expects someone to be outside.
Uu questions may also be used in cases in which the speaker does not necessarily expect a positive answer, but hopes for one. One such situation would be the following: You and a friend are walking down the sttreet and see a small child alone and crying, asking for help in Spanish. You don’t speak Spanish, so you ask your friend if he does:
192 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
78. Uu r-gwèe-u’ dihzh Stil?
Q hab-speak-2s.inf word Spanish “Do you speak Spanish?”
In this case, you don’t actually know if your friend speaks Spanish or not, but you hope he does.
Similarly, uu may be used in the following context: You see someone being injured in an accident and you immediately try to find a doctor:
79. Uu n-u’uh tu do’ctoor n-u’uh rèe’?
Q neut-exist who doctor neut-exist here “Is there a doctor here?”
In this case, the speaker doesn’t have any presuppositions about doctors being in the area, only a desire that this be the case.
What the contexts for uu questions have in common is the speaker’s un- derlying belief that the proposition questioned is necessarily true–either in the actual world (in the cases in which the speaker presupposes a positive answer to a question) or in a set of possible worlds introducted by the speaker’s desire that the questioned proposition be true.
Comparing the Syntax and Semantics of the Question Markers
Now I return to the syntactic differences among the three question mark- ers. In this section, I will account for the syntactic differences between laàa’ and èee , and how these differences reflect their differing semantics.
Laàa’ and èee differ syntactically in only two ways: their respective sentence-initial and sentence-final positions, and their ability to appear with topics.
Why Is èee Sentence-Final?
Question markers crosslinguistically are thought to be generated high in the tree structure. Assuming this is the case in SLQZ, under the principles of antisymmetry, the sentence-final position of èee can only be derived by obligatory movement of the body of the question past èee. Thus it is con- ceivable that laàa’ and èee occupy the same preverbal syntactic position, and differ only in the relative position of the rest of the clause:
￼
80.
IntP
Int’
Int laàa’
IP
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 193
￼￼￼￼(Q) b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly (perf.-dance Mike)
81. IntP IP
Int’
￼￼￼b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly Int (perf.-dance Mike) èee
(Q)
This movement gives the correct linear order. However, it also results in a violation of the GDCF, since both the specifier and head of IntP are now overtly filled. In order to derive a well-formed structure, TP must raise fur- ther to a projection above IntP. I assume that this projection is TopP1, the projection that houses left-dislocated topics:
82. TopP1 IntP
TP Int’ b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly Int
￼￼￼￼(perf.-dance Mike)
èee (Q)
This is supported by the fact that the only elements that may precede sentence-initial question markers and wh-words are vocatives and left- dislocated topics:
83. Gye’eihlly xi b-da’uh Gye’eihlly? Mike what perf-eat Mike
“(As for) Mike, what did Mike eat?”
Left-dislocated topics in SLQZ are elements that have already been pre- viously mentioned and are known to both the speaker and listener. Thus, propositions in the LD topic position are interpreted as presupposed or old
194 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions information. This is consistent with the previously described semantic con-
straints on èee questions.
Why Are Topics Disallowed in laàa Questions?
The second difference between èee and laàa questions is that the latter disallow fronted topics. The fact that laàa questions allow focus, but dis- allow topics, is puzzling in light of the fact that topics are lower than focused constituents in SLQZ (as seen in (87), where a fronted a-topic blocks verb-raising past al, ‘already’:
84. Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady
Mike already perf-eat grasshopper “MIKE already ate the grasshoppers”
85. Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady
Mike perf-eat already grasshopper “MIKE already ate the grasshoppers”
86. A Gye’eihlly al b-da’uh bx:àady
top Mike already perf-eat grasshopper “Mike already ate the grasshoppers”
87. *A Gye’eihlly b-da’uh al bx:àady
top Mike perf-eat already grasshopper “Mike already ate the grasshoppers”
There appears to be no syntactic reason why topics may not appear with laàa’ questions. This constraint, however, is consistent with the semantic requirements of laàa’ questions: they may only serve to question newly in- troduced information. Topics are by definition old information, and thus inconsistent with the subcategorization requirements of laàa’ questions.
The Syntax and Semantics of uu
Uu questions differ most markedly from those with other markers. This is consistent with its clear difference in usage from the others: its usage is de- termined by speaker belief about a questioned context, rather than by the question’s information status.
Most strikingly, uu questions disallow almost all preverbal structures: topics, focused arguments, negation, and preverbal predicate nominals are all blocked from uu questions. At first glance, this suggests that uu may be
￼
5.3 The Syntax of Yes/No Questions 195
generated in a lower position than the other question markers: if it is gen- erated below FocP and NegP-1, this would account for the constraints on other preverbal elements: there would be no space for them between uu and the body of the question:
88.
￼FocP PredP
NegP-1 XP
uu
TP
￼￼￼￼Paradoxically, however, uu questions about future events require verbs with the Definite, rather than Irrealis aspect, as seen in the following examples, repeated from above:
89. Uu s-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr? Q def-sell Mike car
“Will Mike sell the car?”
90. *Uu y-to’oh Gye’eihlly ca’rr
Q irr-sell Mike car
“Will Mike sell the car?”
As previously shown, verbs with the Definite aspect marker differ from other verbs in that they require the propositions they express (and thus the TP containing the verb and its arguments) to raise through MoodP to FocP: this accounts for both their emphatic readings and for the fact that they cannot co-occur with other focus-fronted material. The fact that uu may appear with focused Definite verbs suggests that uu is generated above FocP, in the same position as other question markers.
The incompatibility of the uu question marker with other preverbal con- stituents is an indirect reflex of the modal features of uu questions: they question propositions the speaker either believes to be true or wants to be true. Thus, they introduce into the discourse a set of possible worlds in which the questioned proposition must necessarily be true. These modal features are activated by the movement of the questioned proposition (TP) through MoodP, as with the derivation of sentences with Definite-
196 5 More on the Structure of the Left Periphery: The Syntax of Questions
marked verbs. MoodP is directly above TP, but below TopP, NegP1 and PredP:
91. Uu b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly Q perf-dance Mike
“Did Mike dance?”
IntP
uu FocP (Q)
PredP TopP
NegP1 MoodP
TP Mood’
b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly Mood t (perf-dance Mike)
MoodP then raises to FocP. Again, this is parallel to the derivation of sentences with Definite-marked verbs:
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼92.
IntP (Q)
MoodP
TP
b-gyàa’ah Gye’eihlly Mood tTP (perf-dance Mike)
￼uu
FocP
Mood’
￼PredP
￼￼TopP
NegP
tMoodP
￼￼￼￼Topics, negation, and fronted predicate nominals are licensed in projec- tions above MoodP, and are thus blocked from appearing under the scope of MoodP. Thus, this structure reflects both the semantic structure of uu questions and its syntactic constraints.
5.4 Conclusion
This chapter has shown how the syntactic and semantic features of SLQZ questions can be accounted for under the ordering of functional projections established the previous chapter. It also showed evidence for the presence of IntP, a dedicated projection for the licensing of interrogative elements. Also, a syntactic and semantic account was given for the numerous co- occurrence restrictions, noted widely across a range of languages, between focus movement and wh-movement. This account showed that while (most) wh-movement involves focus movement, it also involves additional movement through IntP. It also provides a unified explanation for the large number of cases in which wh-movement and focus can’t appear in the same sentence, and the small number of structures in which they can. Fur- thermore, the existence of IntP is supported by the possible structures of yes/no questions in SLQZ: question markers high in the tree may appear in sentences with focus-fronted constituents, suggesting that interrogative features are checked in a projection distinct from FocP.
5.4 Conclusion 197
￼
6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
6.1 Overview
SLQZ, like the Zapotec languages generally, expresses temporal functions with verbal prefixes that have traditionally been called aspect markers. (The forms and uses of these markers are described in detail in Chapter 1, and some of the relevant data are repeated below.) In this chapter, I argue, counter to traditional assumptions about Zapotec, that a number of these markers also encode tense features. This is supported by the differing tem- poral interpretations of these aspect markers in different syntactic configu- rations, and by constraints on the interpretation of certain aspect markers in matrix clause and embedded contexts. I also show that the syntactically driven constraints on the interpretation on verbs with different aspect markers support recent proposals (Enç 1987, Abusch 1988, Ogihara 1989, Stowell 1993, 1995) that tense is sensitive to syntactic scope. Spe- cifically, the SLQZ data support Stowell’s (1993, 1995) model of Tense as a syntactic predicate, as well as his idea that some morphological tense markers are not actual heads of Tense projections themselves, but rather polarity or anti-polarity items sensitive to the presence of tense predicates.
Evidence for the presence of syntactic tense, as well as for the scope- sensitive nature of syntactic tense in SLQZ, comes from the fact that preposed CP complements of verbs with certain aspect markers receive different possible tense interpretations than their in-situ counterparts. The clearest cases of this, which will be discussed below, involve clausal com- plements of Perfective and Habitual verbs. These data show that the Per- fective and Habitual aspect markers, contrary to previous assumptions about Zapotec aspect markers, actually indicate the presence of Past and Present tense, as well as aspect.
200 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
6.2 “Aspect” Marking in SLQZ
SLQZ expresses tense and aspect by prefixing one of seven aspectual markers to the verb stem. Only one aspect markermay appear per verb stem. I follow longstanding tradition in Zapotec linguistics and refer to these prefixes as “aspect” markers, even though, as I will show, they may encode tense and mood as well.
￼￼Non-modal aspects Habitual Perfective Progressive Neutral
Allomorphs r-
b-,w-,m-, gu- ca-, cay
n-, ø-
Modal aspects Subjunctive Irrealis Definite
Allomorphs n-,ny-
ch-, l-, y-, g- z-, s-
￼￼Table 1. SLQZ aspect markers.
Six of the seven aspect markers are shown in boldface on the verb stem -tàa’z, “to beat”, in Table 2:
￼Aspect habitual progressive perfective irrealis subjunctive definite
-tàa’z, “beat” rtàa’z catàa’z btàa’z
ytàa’z ntàa’z stàa’z
Gloss
“beats (regularly)” “is beating”
“beat” (past)
“will beat”
“was going to beat” “will definitely beat”
￼￼Table 2. Aspect markers on a verb stem.
The seventh aspect (the Neutral aspect, realized as the prefix n- or as a zero prefix) appears on a small number of verbs (most, but not all, of which are stative or locational):
1. N-àa-ng banguall. neut-be-3s.prox old
“He/she is old”
2. X:-nnàaan-a’ n-u’ Sann Luu’c. poss-mother-1s neut-exist San Lucas “My mother is in San Lucas”
(Many of the verbs that allow marking by the Neutral aspect also allow marking by the Habitual aspect. Habitual aspect marking on these verbs
6.2 “Aspect”MarkinginSLQZ 201
results in an inchoative, rather than stative, reading of the verb. I will dis- cuss this in Section 6.2.1.)
These prefixes across the Zapotec languages have been traditionally referred to as “aspect” markers because they are thought to overtly convey the internal structure of events rather than the temporal relation of the event to the speaker. A simple clause with a verb marked with progressive aspect, for instance, could be used to express a present, past, or future act in progress:
3. Ca-bee’z-a’ lìu’ prog-wait-1s 2s.inf
“I am/was/will be waiting for you”
Similarly, a single Perfective-marked verb can be used to form both past and future perfect constructions:
4. Yzh:ii chih y-zëhny-a’ al b-da’uhw Gye’eihlly. tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike “When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten”
Thus, SLQZ (like other Zapotec languages) has no overt verbal mor- phology for tense. For this reason, it has been assumed that tense plays nei- ther an important syntactic nor semantic role in Zapotec grammar (Black 1994, among others). On closer examination, however, some of the SLQZ aspect markers show the same constraints on possible interpretation asso- ciated with tense markers in overtly tense-marking languages. (Examples of standard uses of these aspect markers are given in Chapter 1, and are re- peated in the following sections as needed.)
This chapter shows that the Habitual and Perfective markers in particu- lar indicate the presence of syntactic tense, and show the same scopal sen- sitivities to tense as do the Present and Past tense markers in English. Likewise, the Subjunctive marker shows all the syntactic and semantic fea- tures of Past tense. The Neutral and Progressive markers, on the other hand, are indeed purely aspectual, and do not inherently encode any tense features of their own.
The two remaining modal aspect markers, however, show more compli- cated behavior. The Irrealis marker, which receives either a simple future or subjunctive reading depending on syntactic context, appears to encode Present tense on its subjunctive reading, but not on its simple future read- ing, where it encodes Future tense. The Definite marker, which can express either emphatic future readings or incompleted events in the immediate past, may encode either Present or Past tense, depending on its context. I will show that the future reading of Definite-marked verbs results not from the presence of Future tense, but from the combined effects of Present tense and the Definite marker’s aspectual features.
￼
202 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
Before discussing these phenomena in detail, I briefly discuss the theo- retical models of tense and aspect to be assumed in the rest of this chapter.
6.3 Theoretical Assumptions
This chapter assumes and shows supporting evidence for Stowell’s (1993, 1995) model of tense, based on earlier work by Zagona (1990), Enç (1987), and Abusch (1988). While earlier models of tense treat tense as having referential or operator-like properties (Enç 1987, Partee 1973, among others), Zagona and Stowell treat tense as a predicate. Stowell pro- poses that tense is the head of a functional projection TP, and is a dyadic predicate taking the utterance time (UT) or other reference time (RT) as its external argument, and the event time (ET) as its internal argument. These temporal arguments are realized as “Zeit-phrases” (ZPs). The head of the tense projection (TENSE) orders these arguments with respect to one another.
For instance, PAST tense is a TP head that orders a reference time of an event (ZP-RT) after the event time (ZP-ET). (In matrix clauses, this external reference time is generally the utterance time.) ZP-ET, in turn, contains an operator that c-commands and controls (= assigns a value to) a temporal argument in spec, VP. This controlled temporal argument within VP, which Stowell calls PRO-ZP, locates the event denoted by VP within this time.
Thus, in a simple past sentence such as Mike ate the grasshoppers, the RT (the present time) is ordered after the ET (the time of Mike eating). Since no other temporal arguements syntactically control ZP-RT, it is in- terpreted as the utterance time (UT) by default. ET, in turn, passes its tem- poral value to the temporal argument of VP:
5.
￼TP ZP-RT T’
￼￼T PAST (after)
ZP-ET
Z’
Z VP
PRO-ZP
(M. eating)
￼￼￼When ZP-RT is controlled by another temporal argument, T takes this time as its external argument, rather than the utterance time. For instance,
6.3 TheoreticalAssumptions 203
in a sentence such as “Tomorrow, Felipe will say Mike ate the grasshop- pers”, Mike’s eating is interpreted as necessarily preceding the time tomor- row when Felipe will speak, but need not be interpreted as happening before the present time (when the speaker predicts what Felipe will say). The tense structure of this sentence (with other projections omitted for clarity) is as follows:
T’
ZP-ETi (time of saying)
Z’
Z VP PRO-ZPi V’
V TP say
ZP-RTi T’
T AFTER
￼6.
TP ZP-UT
T FUTURE (before)
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼Since TP appears in both the matrix and embedded clauses, it must be the case that there are two separate RTs: the external argument of the ma- trix clause TP, and the external argument of the embedded clause TP. The external argument of the matrix clause (“Tomorrow, Felipe will say...”) is the UT. Tense in the matrix clause orders UT before the time of the event of “saying”.
As seen in the tree above, the external ZP argument of the embedded clause TP gets its temporal value from the PRO-ZP argument of the matrix clause verb, which takes the embedded TP as its complement. In cases such as this, in which the external argument of Tense is a time other than UT, Stowell assumes that the argument behaves like controlled PRO.
Demirdache and Uribe-Extebarria (1997) (hereafter D&U) expand upon Stowell’s model, and incorporate aspect into the tense system. They pro- pose that aspect, as well as tense, is a time-denoting predicate taking two time-denoting phrases as arguments. Because aspect denotes time intervals within or around an event situated in a particular time, they propose that the aspectual predicate is generated as the complement of the predicate TENSE. Thus Stowell’s ET becomes AspP in their analysis:
ZP-ET (time of eating)
204 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
7.
AspP
Tense takes the reference/utterance time of an event (UT) as its external argument (as in Stowell’s account), and the assertion time (the time inter- val focused/selected by Aspect) (AST) as its internal argument.
The head of AspP (which I will refer to as ASPECT, consistent with Stowell’s label of TENSE for the head of TP)1 takes the assertion time (AST) as its external argument, and the time of the event denoted by the VP as its internal argument:
8.
TP
UT
T
￼TP
UT T’ T
￼￼￼T’ AspP
AST Asp’ Asp VP
￼￼￼In short, the AST is ordered by both Tense and Aspect.
An example of this can be seen in a simple past progressive expression, such as “Mike was eating grasshoppers”. PROGRESSIVE aspect is a predicate that orders the AST within the period of time in which an event takes place. Thus, AST highlights a point in time during an event in pro- gress. In “Mike was eating grasshoppers”, for instance, AST highlights a point in time within the period in which Mike is eating, and PAST tense orders UT after AST. Thus, AST, the interval of time denoted by “Mike was eating”, is ordered both inside the eating event (by ASPECT) and before UT (by TENSE):
1 Likewise, following Stowell, I use initial-capped tense/aspect names (Past, Per- fective) to refer to the actual tense/aspect markers themselves (such as English Past marker -ed and SLQZ Progressive marker ca-). Terms expressed in capi- tals (e.g. PAST) refer to tense predicates themselves, while lowercased terms (“past”) are used in all other contexts.
￼
￼9.
TP
T PAST
T’
AspP
6.4 Perfective“Aspect”inSLQZ 205
VP
(time of Mike eating)
￼UT
￼￼(after) AST Asp’
Asp PROG. (within)
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼past t1 AST t2 UT future
t1=time eating starts, t2=time eating ends, AST=time denoted by “was eating”, UT=utterance time.
There are clearly some differences between Stowell’s and D&U’s pro- posals that need to be reconciled (such as the question of whether the internal ZP argument of Tense is the same as AST or serves some independ- ent semantic purpose). I will return to this issue, along with the question of the exact syntactic instantiation of these models in SLQZ.
6.4 Perfective “Aspect” in SLQZ
Now I address the evidence for tense in SLQZ. One of the aspect markers that most clearly reveals the presence of tense in SLQZ is the Perfective marker. For this reason, I will use the behavior of the Perfective marker to begin this discussion. I will show that the Perfective marker shows a num- ber of semantic features that have been commonly associated with past tense, and that the presence of the Perfective marker is a diagnostic for the presence of PAST in TP in SLQZ.
6.4.1 The Distribution of the Perfective Aspect Marker
To reiterate from Chapter 1, the Perfective marker is most commonly used in past, resultative contexts:
10. B-guhty-a’ bzihny perf-kill-1s mouse “I killed a mouse”
206 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
It may also be used, however, to express future perfectives (repeated from (4)):
11. Yzh:ii chih y-zëhny-a’ al b-da’uhw Gye’eihlly tomorrow when irr-arrive-1s already perf-eat Mike “When I arrive tomorrow, Mike will have already eaten”
Such contexts suggest that the Perfective marker in SLQZ has the canonical features of Perfective aspect: it denotes completed events. In D&U’s terms, Perfective aspect can be defined as a predicate PERFECTIVE that orders AST after a completed event:
12.
AspP
Asp’
￼￼AST
￼Asp
PERF t1....t2 (after)
Thus, the interval of time denoted by AST in Perfective contexts is a point after the completion of an event.
When expressing past events, however, the Perfective marker may also denote states without explicit endpoints:
13. G-uhc-ëng nnàa’ah perf-be-3s.prox heavy “He was heavy”
14. B-yuall-a’ perf-thirsty-1s
“I was thirsty”
There are no attested cases, however, of Perfective marking being used on verbs expressing future states.
An apparent exception, however, is the case of imperatives, which are frequently formed with Perfective-marked verbs:
15. B-ìi’lly! perf-sing
“Sing!”
I will return to this construction after defining the aspectual features of the Perfect marker, and show that this asymmetry results directly from the interaction of mood and aspect, and is consistent with the definition of PERFECTIVE aspect given above.
VP
6.4 Perfective“Aspect”inSLQZ 207
6.4.2 Embedded Perfective Clauses
In spite of examples such as (15), Perfective-marked verbs in SLQZ show many of the canonical features of Past tense. A context in which these fea- tures reveal themselves is the interpretation of Perfective-marked verbs in embedded-clause constructions. In these constructions, the possible read- ings of embedded Perfective clauses prove to be dependent on the tense features of the matrix clause. This dependency suggests that tense, as well as aspect, is encoded by the Perfective marker in SLQZ.
Perfective Under Past-Interpreted Matrix Clauses
Perfective-marked verbs in complements of matrix verbs with past-tense interpretations may receive either simultaneous or past-shifted readings: that is, the embedded clause past event may be construed as either happen- ing simultaneously with the matrix clause event (the simultaneous reading) or before it (the past-shifted reading):2
16. Nài ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly a Li’eb b-ìi’lly yesterday neut-say Mike TOP Felipe perf-sing “Yesterday, Mike said Felipe sang”
[Felipe was singing at time of saying/
Felipe was singing before time of saying]
Complements of “say”, however, are often preposed in SLQZ. Non- preposed complements of “say” are only interpreted as indirect quotations, while preposed complements may be, but aren’t necessarily, interpreted as direct quotations:
17. Ø-nnaa Gyeeihly r-ahcx:ùu’w-a’
neut-say Mike hab-sick-1s
“Mikei said Ij am sick” / *“Mike said, ‘I am sick’ ”
18. R-ahcx:ùu’w-a’ ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly
hab-sick-1s neut-say Mike
“Mikei said Ij am sick” / “Mike said, ‘I am sick”
Preposed clausal complements may not co-occur with preverbal argu- ments or wh-words (other than “why”, which may co-occur with prever- bal arguments, as shown in the preceding chapter).
2 nnaa “say” is one of a small number of non-locational/stative predicates in SLQZ that takes the Neutral aspect marker. The Neutral marker in the sen- tences given here may be interpreted with a past-tense reading. To ensure a nonambigous temporal interpretation of “say”, most of these sentences also include temporal adverbs such as “yesterday”.
￼￼
208 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
19. Guhc ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly r-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb? when neut-say Mike hab-sick Felipe “When did Mike say Felipe was sick?”
20. *Guhc r-ahcx:ùu’w Li’eb ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly? when hab-sick Felipe neut-say Mike
“When did Mike say Felipe was sick?”
In the previous chapter, I showed that preverbal arguments occupy the Focus projection FocP, and wh-words occupy a separate projection that nevertheless has strict co-occurence restrictions with filled FocP. The fact that preposed complements of “say” share the same distributional con- straints as focused constituents suggests that they occupy the specifier of FocP.
When a complement containing a Perfective-marked verb is preposed from a matrix clause with a past meaning, the possibility of a simultaneous reading disappears, and the preposed complement may only receive a past- shifted reading. That is, the event described in the complement clause can only be interpreted as happening before the matrix clause event:
21. A Li’eb b-ìi’lly ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly nài’ TOP Felipe perf-sing neut-say Mike yesterday “Yesterday, Mike said Felipe sang”
[F. sang before Mike said he did/
*Felipe sang at the same time Mike said he did]
This contrasts directly with (16) (repeated below), in which a non- preposed complement with a Perfective verb may receive either a past- shifted or simultaneous reading:
22. Nài ø-nnaa Gye’eihlly a Li’eb b-ìi’lly yesterday neut-say Mike TOP Felipe perf-sing “Yesterday, Mike said Felipe sang”
[Felipe was singing at time of saying/ Felipe was singing before time of saying]
The contrasting possible interpretations of (21) and (22) show that the aspectual morpheme itself can’t be the only factor contributing to temporal interpretation: if Perfective marking encoded only aspectual features, the ordering of the clauses should not affect their possible tense interpretation. Furthermore, the fact that there is a clear correlation between syntactic structure and possible tense readings suggests that tense is realized as part of the syntax.
The fact that the simultaneous reading of Perfective complements of past matrix clauses is only possible when the complement is not pre- posed—that is, when the Perfective complement is below the matrix PAST
￼
6.4 Perfective“Aspect”inSLQZ 209
clause—also suggests that Tense is sensitive to scope. This is consistent with a number of recent proposals that note the sensitivity of Tense to sco- pal factors in a number of languages (Enç 1987, Abusch 1988, Ogihara 1988). In the next section, I will briefly summarize one proposal (Stowell 1993, 1995) that treats Tense as a purely syntactic phenomenon, and treats morphological tense markers as polarity items that need to be in specific scopal relations with the head of TP. I will then show that this model accounts for the SLQZ data in (21) and (22) in a principled way.
Tense Markers as Polarity Items
Stowell (1995) attributes the possibility of simultaneous or past-shifted readings for past-under-past constructions to the syntactic and semantic re- quirements of past-tense markers. He proposes that morphological past tense markers (such as English -ed ) are not actual instantiations of the PAST tense predicate itself, but are polarity items that need to be licensed by PAST. He thus labels such past-tense markers Past Polarity Items (PPIs). Justification for this treatment of past tense markers comes from the fact that their presence does not always translate into an absolute past- tense interpretation. He cites the following example (Kamp and Rohrer, cited in Abusch 1988, p. 19) to show this:
23. John decided a week ago that in ten days at breakfast he would tell his mother that they were having their last meal together.
Recall that Stowell defines PAST tense as a predicate ordering a refer- ence time after an event time. The past auxiliary “were” in the preceding example, however, is problematic for this analysis: the event of “having their last meal together” is neither past with regard to the utterance time, nor with the matrix clause event (the time of John’s deciding) nor with the embedded clause telling event. Rather, “were” is interpreted as simultane- ous with “next week”. “Were”, then, cannot be the manifestation of a PAST tense head itself, but only a reflex of PAST in a preceding clause. The simultaneous reading of embedded clauses in past-under-past con- structions has long been problematic for analyses of Tense; previous litera- ture proposed that the embedded clause was actually PRESENT tense with regard to the matrix past (Comrie 1985, 1986) and that morphological rules forced past-tense morphology to surface on embedded verbs.
Stowell’s treatment of past morphological markers as polarity items, however, accounts for both simultaneous and past-shifted readings in a principled way. Because Tense is realized as a syntactic head in his model, he takes the necessary licensing conditions for PPIs to likewise be syntac- tic: PPIs must be within the syntactic scope the predicate PAST. Stowell’s proposal does not lay out specific syntactic conditions for licensing of PPIs, but a relation of structural superiority of TENSE over PPIs (such as c-command) seems to be assumed.
￼
210 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
In the English example above, then, the two possible readings for the embedded clause result from the presence of two possible licensers: the head of TP in the matrix clause, and the head of TP in the embedded clause.
When the matrix and complement clause events are interpreted as occur- ring simultaneously, both the matrix and complement clause Past markers are licensed by the same head: the Tense head in the matrix clause, which c-commands both the matrix clause and embedded clause verbs. (The Tense head in the embedded clause is presumably inactive in these cases.) Thus, both the matrix and embedded clause events are interpreted as PAST with regard to the same time: UT.
In cases in which the matrix and complement clause events are inter- preted as occurring at separate times, the matrix and embedded clause PPIs are licensed by separate heads: the Tense heads of their respective clauses.
The SLQZ Perfective Marker as a Past Polarity Item
Now I return to the SLQZ data. Stowell’s proposal can easily account for the different possible readings of the SLQZ embedded and preposed Per- fective clauses in (21) and (22). I assume that the Perfective marker, besides encoding aspectual features, is also a Past Polarity Item (PPI) (fol- lowing Stowell 1995) that needs to appear under the syntactic scope of PAST tense. In (22) the simultaneous reading of the embedded clause is possible because the PPI in the embedded clause can be licensed by PAST in the matrix clause. Thus, the matrix clause and embedded clause past times are the same.
In (21) the preposed complement of “say” cannot be licensed by matrix clause PAST tense because it has raised to a position above the matrix PAST head. Thus, the embedded clause must provide its own PAST tense, and the times of the matrix event (saying) and embedded clause event (singing) have to be different. (22) optionally allows the past-shifted read- ing by allowing PAST to appear in both the matrix and embedded clauses.
This raises the question of why preposed Perfective complements of past-interpreted clauses must have past-shifted readings, and cannot have purely indexical past readings: that is, why can’t (21) be interpreted to mean that Felipe was singing at some time in the past with regard to the ut- terance time, but after the matrix clause event time? The same issue arises in English: an English past-under-past construction such as Mike said Felipe is sick can only have a simultaneous or past-shifted reading; there is no possible reading in which the embedded clause event (Felipe’s sick- ness) is interpreted in the past, but after the matrix clause event (Mike’s saying).
The English past-shifted case can be accounted for as follows: since the embedded clause remains under the syntactic scope of the matrix clause, the external ZP argument of the embedded clause TP is controlled by the matrix clause ET. When PAST tense is present in both the
￼
6.4 Perfective“Aspect”inSLQZ 211
matrix and embedded clauses, then, the embedded clause event is obligato- rily ordered in the past with regard to the matrix clause past event.
The necessity of past-shifted readings with extraposed Perfective com- plements in SLQZ is derived in a parallel fashion. In order for a Perfec- tive complement to extrapose, it must contain PAST tense itself in order to license the presence of the Perfective marker. In its base-generated posi- tion, then, the external ZP argument of the complement clause TP is con- trolled by the ET of the past matrix clause event, as in the English case. Thus, in its base-generated position, the embedded Perfective clause receives a past-shifted reading.
When the clause preposes to the matrix clause Focus position, the exter- nal ZP argument of the preposed clause TP has no possible binder, and is thus interpreted as UT. Thus, in its preposed position, the complement clause event is interpreted as past with regard to UT.
However, when complement clauses raise out of the matrix clause, both the raised and base-generated copies are interpreted. (Further evidence for the obligatory interpretation of both raised and non-raised copies of clausal complements comes from the behavior of present-under-past constructions, to be discussed below.) The requirement that both copies of the raised Per- fective complement in sentences such as (21) be interpreted results in a type of “double access” reading: the Perfective complement is simultane- ously interpreted as describing an event that occurred in the past with re- gard to the matrix clause UT (the reading of the preposed copy of the complement) and in the past with regard to the matrix clause past ET (the reading of the base-generated copy of the complement). Since past-shifted events are necessarily ordered in the past with regard to a present UT, the past-shifted reading results.
Perfective Under Irrealis Matrix Clauses
The correlation between syntactic scope and tense interpretation is further supported by the interpretation of Perfective-marked verbs in the comple- ments of verbs with Irrealis aspect marking. (Verbs with Irrealis aspect receive future interpretations in matrix clauses) :
24. Yzh:ii y-nnìi Gye’eihlly g-uhcx:ùu’w Li’eb tomorrow irr-say Mike perf-sick Felipe “Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe was sick”
Here, Felipe can be interpreted as being sick either before Mike said so or, more naturally, before this sentence was uttered. On the first reading, Felipe may be sick at UT, and the speaker expresses the possibility that Mike will report today’s event of Felipe’s sickness tomorrow. On the sec- ond reading, Felipe’s sickness can only be interpreted as already being a past event when the sentence is spoken.
The possibility of these two readings, however, results from the interpretive ambiguities allowed by a single structure. When Perfective
￼
212 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
complements of Irrealis verbs surface beneath the matrix clause, the em- bedded clause RT is controlled by the matrix clause Tense, which thus al- lows the reading in which the embedded Past event is interpreted as Past with respect to a future time. This is shown in the tree below (projections for focus, agreement, etc. omitted for clarity):
￼25.
TP
￼UT FUTURE
T
T’ ZP-ETi
Z’
Z VP
V’
V TP say
ZP-RTi T’
T PAST
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼ZP-ET
Z’
Z VP
￼￼￼PRO-ZP sick
V’
￼This structure accounts for the two possible readings of (24): the past event in the embedded clause is necessarily interpreted as ordered in the past with regard to the future matrix clause ET. However, nothing in the structure above prevents the embedded clause event from being construed as prior to the matrix clause UT: events ordered in the past with regard to the matrix clause UT are also, necessarily, ordered in the past with regard to the matrix clause future ET, as shown in the timeline below:
26. UT ET1 _______|________|___|_____|_____
<-------ET2-->
Thus, the embedded clause past event (ET2) is ordered before the future matrix clause ET (ET1). The ordering between ET2 and UT,
V
6.4 Perfective“Aspect”inSLQZ 213
however, is indeterminate; ET2 may precede, follow, or overlap with UT, as long as it precedes ET1. Thus, (24) may receive readings in which the embedded event is ordered before UT, as well as before the matrix clause future ET.
When a Perfective complement of an Irrealis matrix clause is preposed, however, it may only be interpreted as describing an event occurring before the UT:
27. G-uhcx:ùu’ Li’eb y-nnìi Gye’eihlly yzh:ii perf-sick Felipe irr-say Mike tomoroow “Tomorrow, Mike will say Felipe was sick”
This can only mean Mike was sick before UT—that is, Mike’s sickness is already a past event at the time the sentence is uttered.
Like the Perfective-under-past constructions discussed in the previous section, the interpretive constraint on preposed Perfective-under-future clauses is also the result of a double-access reading. When Perfective- marked complements of Irrealis verbs are overtly preposed, the external ZP argument of the complement clause TP gets two separate interpreta- tions: it is controlled by the matrix clause future ET in its base-generated position and it is interpreted as UT in its preposed position (outside the scope of matrix clause tense). Since both the raised and base-generated copies of the Perfective complement are interpreted, the past event in the complement clause must be simultaneously interpreted as past with regard to both the matrix clause ET and matrix clause UT. The only way for both conditions to hold true, however, is for the embedded clause past event to be ordered before the matrix clause UT: events preceding the matrix clause UT are necessarily interpreted as past with regard to the matrix clause future ET. However, the converse does not hold: as seen in (26), events preceding the matrix clause future ET do not necessarily precede the ma- trix clause UT. Once again, this constraint on temporal interpretation is unexpected if the Perfective marker were a reflex of aspectual features only.
More Evidence: Perfective Aspect in Relative Clauses
SLQZ Perfective-marked verbs show the behavior of PAST verbs in overtly tense-marking languages in other contexts as well. One such con- text is in relative clauses, which allow a different range of possible tempo- ral interpretations than other complement clauses containing Past tense.
In English, relative clauses with PAST tense receive only independent interpretations when they appear under the scope of another PAST tense:
28 John saw the man who kissed Sandy.
￼
214 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
Here, both the times of seeing and kissing are interpreted as before the utterance time, but are unordered with regard to each other: that is, it is possible for John to have seen the man before he kissed Sandy. This con- trasts with the possible interpretation of other PAST clauses under PAST verbs, which only allow simultaneous and past-shifted readings.
Stowell argues that the possibility of such unordered tense readings of relative clause events points to obligatory extraposition of the DP contain- ing the relative clause out of the syntactic scope of matrix clause tense (specifically, out of the scope of the external temporal argument of VP.). He suggests that this movement could actually be overt: perhaps it is movement of the relative clause DP out of VP to AgrOP (irrelevant projec- tions omitted below for clarity):
29.
DP
AgrO
￼AspP
AgrO’
￼￼￼VP
￼PRO-ZP Vt
If Perfective aspect marking in SLQZ is a diagnostic for the presence of PAST tense, as has been argued in the previous section, SLQZ Perfective verbs in relative clauses should behave identically to English PAST rela- tive clauses when embedded under matrix clause verbs with past interpre- tations. This prediction is borne out:
30. B-dëidy Lia Pa’amm li’ebr studya’aann nih g-uhcx:ùuw perf-give Ms. Pam book student REL perf-sick “Pam gave a book to the student who was sick”
Here, as in the English example, the events of giving and sickness are unordered: the student could have become sick after receiving the book, for instance.
The SLQZ data, then, show clearly that tense as well as aspect are pre- sent in the syntax and semantics of SLQZ. Furthermore, the difference in temporal interpretation between extraposed and non-extraposed comple- ments of past-interpreted verbs supports Stowell’s idea that certain mor- phological markers associated with tense need to be within the syntactic scope of TENSE.
6.4.3 The Interaction of PAST Tense and Perfective Aspect
In the previous section, I showed extensive evidence that the Perfective aspect marker in SLQZ is sensitive to the presence of PAST tense. In this
V’
￼￼
6.4 Perfective“Aspect”inSLQZ 215
section, I will discuss its aspectual features and their interaction with Tense, and show that the asymmetric distribution of telic/atelic predicates with Perfective marking under Past and Future tense falls out naturally from the interaction of Tense and Aspect.
If the preceding analysis is correct, then the Perfective marker is a PPI, and must appear in the scope of PAST tense. What remains to be clarified is the content of AspP, and the interaction of the aspectual predicate ASPECT with the Perfective marker.
I will follow D&U’s definition of PERFECTIVE aspect as “a spatio- temporal predicate with the meaning of after,” and will show below that this definition consistently accounts for the possible distribution of SLQZ Perfective marking in different semantic contexts. Thus, the tense/aspect configuration that licenses the Perfective marker is as follows: Perfective aspect marking may only appear when licensed by PAST tense, a predicate ordering the external RT after AST, and PERFECTIVE aspect, which orders AST after ET:
31.
￼TP
RT T’
￼￼ASPP (after) AST Asp’
T PAST
￼￼Asp PERF
VP (after) ..t1....t2..
￼This configuration accounts for all the possible, attested uses of Perfec- tive aspect, while ruling out disallowed usages: when RT refers to the ut- terance time, a simple past reading results; when it refers to a past or future time, a past perfect or future perfect reading results.
In its most common usage, the Perfective marker in SLQZ is used to de- scribe completed, telic events:
32. B-guhty-a’ bzihny perf-kill-1s mouse “I killed a mouse”
The temporal structure of this sentence is schematized in the timeline below. The event of killing the mouse has fixed beginning and ending points (t1 and t2). AST is ordered after the end of the event (t2) by PERFECTIVE aspect, and UT, in turn, is ordered after AST by PAST tense.
216 6 The Interaction of Tense and Aspect in San Lucas Quiaviní Zapotec
33. t1 t2 AST UT ______________|______|____|______|______________
